Parliamentary support in pursuing that essential course for change will be absolutely vital.
I share the view expressed by Mrs Theato that it would not be acceptable in any way at all for us to seek to operate new arrangements without a change in the law.
Change in the law is fundamental.
There are preparations which can be made and they are specified and set out with the full reassurances in the reform strategy, but enactment of change in the legislation is obviously of fundamental importance to the operation of the new system.
Essentially - and with legal change - the Commission will systematically move away from the current centralised system of prior approval of each financial transaction by the Financial Controller and instead strengthen the internal control systems within spending departments so that Directors-General are better equipped to take responsibility for decisions with an impact on the European Union budget.
In addition, and to achieve better assurances than those provided under the present system, the new system of decentralised controls must be complemented by setting up an internal audit service - "the second key" as Herr Bösch said, established in a way that is closely consistent with the recommendations of the Committee of Experts.
That service will open on 1 May this year.
It will be headed by a professionally qualified member of the audit profession and its independence must and will be guaranteed through a new provision to be added in the financial regulation.
The new service will report to me and it will be accompanied by an Audit Progress Board chaired by my colleague, Mrs Schreyer, who I am delighted to see in the Chamber this evening.
As Budgets Commissioner, here responsibilities already include relations with the Court of Auditors.
This Audit Progress Board will ensure effective and rigorous follow-up to internal audits.
I want to emphasise strongly that changing our control systems will definitely not mean relaxing them.
The proposed change will make the systems more effective, both in terms of inputs and in terms of measured and accountable outcomes.
I can also specifically assure the House that we are not going for what is sometimes called "a big bang approach".
Financial control' s ex ante visa for each spending department will only be relinquished as and when the internal control system in a department is shown to be fully adequate.
I am somewhat surprised that paragraph 10 of the draft resolution does not appear to address the fundamental criticisms of the current centralised financial control function made in both reports of the Committee of Independent Experts.
That committee was very clear about the need to abolish the centralised ex ante visa.
It was clear too on the need to separate internal audit from financial control.
In addition, I do not believe that paragraph 10 fully reflects the opinion of the Court of Auditors in 1997.
Naturally the Court will be able to give its considered opinion on the proposed changes to the Financial Regulation but it is useful to recall Mr Karlsson' s comments to this House last month. "The Commission's internal control" he said "is not forceful enough in preventing incorrect operation.
For instance, the Financial Controller granted a positive a priori visa in most of the cases of mismanagement or irregularities recently uncovered.
At the same time, the internal audit function is carried out in an uncoordinated way by several bodies, notably the same Financial Controller, the Inspectorate General and by some units operating Directorates-General."
The centralised ex ante approval system was doubtlessly originally designed to ensure carefulness but, over the years, it has had the perverse effect of reducing the extent to which managers feel responsible for their decisions.
I do not believe that there is any real disagreement between us on this.
I take it from paragraph 10 that the underlying preoccupation of honourable Members is that there should be a carefully managed transition.
That will most certainly be the character of the change as honourable Members will see when they read the reform strategy document.
Our objective, the committee' s objective, the Court of Auditors' objective is not to abolish financial control, it is to get rid of and improve upon centralised financial control.
Before leaving this area I would add that we agree with the rapporteur that the existing internal audit function must be maintained pending the establishment of the new independent internal audit service in a matter of months.
Turning quickly to the section of the resolution on fighting fraud, corruption, mismanagement and nepotism: the major new proposal of the report concerns reporting by Commission officials of perceived wrong-doing.
As I made clear in the hearings last September and on other occasions, we are at one in the belief that there is value in defining the best possible mechanisms for this purpose although obviously we all hope that it will rarely be needed.
Since June of last year, the OLAF regulation has given better guidance to staff about reporting possible irregularities.
We propose to complement those provisions by defining the rights and obligations for officials to report suspected wrong-doing through internal channels but not exclusively within the same hierarchical line.
The possibility of using specified external channels will also be addressed.
We are seeking to implement best practice.
Serious response to reports, confidentiality at early stages and career protection will be assured for people who report wrong-doing in good faith and in ways that do not compromise investigations by untimely disclosure.
As a corollary, there will be safeguards for officials who are the subject of false allegations.
A communication later this year will give full details.
I do not think Parliament will be disappointed by what we will propose.
I am persuaded, however, by the suggestion in paragraph 34 of the report on using external bodies to enforce existing provisions on financial liability.
We already plan to reform the existing disciplinary procedures to ensure thoroughness, fairness, consistency and professionalism.
And we will propose the establishment of an interinstitutional Disciplinary Board - something else on which we will need the support and understanding of Parliament.
A communication in June will set out the full proposal for change.
Standards in public life is the next main section of the report before the House.
With the introduction of a series of codes of conduct the current Commission has begun to develop an explicit ethical framework.
This will be taken a step further with a proposal in June for an interinstitutional agreement on a committee on standards in public life.
That is in line with the draft resolution.
An important role for the committee will be to give advice on ethics and standards and to supervise common and separate codes of conduct for the institutions.
I welcome Parliament's support for that.
We are also currently examining how we can most effectively implement the proposal for a classification system for documents, made in paragraph 50 of Mr van Hulten's report.
The draft resolution rightly recalls the Commission's accountability to this Parliament.
President Prodi and Vice-President de Palacio and other colleagues have demonstrated the Commission's practical commitment to that.
I hope that we will soon be able to agree a code of conduct on relations between our institutions which will include updated rules on access to documents.
The point was very properly raised by Mr Elles and referred to by Mrs Thors.
I am sure they are aware that in mid-December we officially received the draft framework agreement with Parliament.
We are now waiting for Parliament to decide when it wishes to begin negotiations on the text.
We are very happy to proceed as rapidly as possible.
The report rightly emphasises the central importance that human resources policy must have in reform.
I am glad to say to Mr van Hulten and Mr Haarder that the detailed recommendations on recruitment, training, appraisal and the appointment to management positions are very much in line with our own thinking and our own proposals.
I also want to move towards a linear career system because the current category system is no longer adapted to the needs of our institutions.
It certainly blocks the advance and mobility of people with proven capabilities.
Members, who, in the course of this debate, have properly praised Commission officials, who in the great majority and typically are of high integrity, hard-working and of great capability, are absolutely right in the comments that they have made.
While the reform strategy White Paper will clearly outline our ideas on these and other points, detail and precision are obviously essential.
A series of communications will therefore follow in the coming months.
Each of them will be available for reflection and response by this House.
It is, meanwhile, very obvious that we will need to work closely with Parliament, as an institution, on central matters of common interest, notably pay and pensions and the revision of the staff regulations.
On this latter point we are reflecting on whether it might be useful to adopt a framework regulation which makes common provision on leading issues like pay, conditions, staff representation rights and so on, but enables the different institutions to operate implementing rules on other matters.
The early thoughts of Parliament on this consultative idea would be especially welcome.
I conclude by referring to paragraph 15 of the resolution before the House relating to the resource requirements of our policies for change.
That is most certainly relevant.
We are sure that there will be an important "reform dividend" as the modernisation measures begin to foster increased efficiency and better management in the use of resources.
It is very clear, however, that parts of the Commission services are already very stretched.
Parliament has frequently made that point.
Secondly, it is also clear that reform will require some new investment in training for skills and in technology.
Thirdly, it is very clear that increased preparations for enlargement must be undertaken.
They are already having implications for resource availability.
It is also clear that if we take on new tasks - which we will surely be asked to do by the Council and Parliament - we will have to identify so-called "negative priorities" and drop those negative priorities in order to create spare capacity.
A central feature of the reform will therefore be a more rigorous process for tying the process of priority-setting into resource allocation under a system of activity-based management.
I want to emphasise, however, that whilst internal discipline on priority-setting will certainly be introduced by the Commission, it can only be fully effective if Parliament and the Council share it and take an equally stringent attitude to the demands made on the Commission.
The Commission therefore welcomes paragraph 15 of Mr van Hulten's report.
I conclude, Mr President, by thanking the House for its attention during an unavoidably lengthy speech and by expressing sincere gratitude to the rapporteur, to the Committee on Budgetary Control and to the other committees which gave their opinions.
We look forward to working closely with this House on the finalisation of the reform strategy package and then, most important of all, working together with this House on its implementation continually through the years that will be required on such complexities.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
(The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m.)
Middle East peace process (continuation)
The next item is the continuation of the Council and Commission statements on the Middle East peace process.
I am very grateful to the President of the Council for the statement this morning on the Middle East at the beginning of this debate and for hearing some of Minister Gama' s insights, as he arrived hot-foot from the region.
My only regret is that my own commitment to open the European Reconstruction Agency on Monday meant that I could not take part myself in that trip to the Middle East, even though, as I mentioned earlier in the day - which is another story - events conspired to maroon me at Munich airport rather than transport me to Thessaloniki.
Such is life.
I hope that honourable Members will excuse me if I am not able to stay to the end of the debate as I would, in all normal circumstances, wish to do.
The debate was fixed for this morning and on that basis I had arranged to see visitors from the Balkans this evening.
So I hope I can count on the understanding of the House on this occasion.
It is not something, I assure you, which I would wish to make a practice of.
Like honourable Members, I welcome the United States' efforts that have relaunched the Syrian/Israeli negotiations, despite the Syrian decision that they needed more time before resuming the talks that were scheduled to start again today.
There is reasonable hope that a basis for a peace agreement can be built in the near future. I also hope that progress in the Syrian track will pave the way for an early resumption of Lebanese/Israeli talks which could then advance in parallel towards an overall deal on Israel's relations with its northern neighbours.
At the same time we must not lose sight of the Palestinian track.
The situation of the Palestinians has always been the core issue of the conflict.
A fair and, indeed, generous deal with them remains the key to lasting peace in the Middle East.
Israelis and Palestinians have made substantial progress in implementing the Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum.
Although there has been some slippage, I trust that the remaining Israeli troop redeployments will materialise soon.
Similarly, despite the indication the day before yesterday that the timetable for the Framework Agreement on permanent status has been pushed beyond the mid-February deadline, I very much hope that the much more important September deadline for the final agreement on permanent status will be reached.
I was reassured that this was also the view of Prime Minister Barak and President Arafat, when they met on Monday.
Honourable Members will know that one particular concern of ours has been that there should be a resumption of progress on the multilateral track.
This is far from straightforward but we will do what we can to make this possible, in close liaison with the US and Russian co-sponsors as well as the regional parties.
We are charged with particular responsibility for the promotion of regional economic development.
The beginning of the talks with Syria paved the way for a convening of the multilateral steering group in Moscow at the end of the month.
I look forward to attending that meeting and hope that at last we can begin to push things forward again.
The European Union has an important role to play in the peace process, as all sides - Palestinians, Israelis, their Arab neighbours and the United States - have acknowledged.
Nor is our role confined to that of banker.
We must be prepared to act swiftly to support the consolidation of peace in the region.
But we should not kid ourselves: a comprehensive Middle East peace deal comes with a hefty price tag.
The Commission is already considering the implications for the European Union of the recent encouraging developments.
We intend to share our more detailed thoughts on the matter with Parliament and Council soon.
But let me remind honourable Members that the European Union is no slouch when it comes to financial support for the peace process.
We are the largest of all donors to the Palestinians.
We have also offered very substantial support to Jordan, Lebanon, Syria and Egypt.
With the Israelis we have established closer cooperation in a number of areas of particular interest to them.
The Community contribution of over EUR 600 million in grants and loans between 1994 and 1998 effectively underpinned the Palestinian authority and contributed substantially towards the reconstruction of the deteriorated physical infrastructure in the West Bank and Gaza.
European Union Member States together contributed another EUR 860 million during that crucial period.
In this context, let me applaud the important steps that the Palestinian authority has recently taken to improve budgetary transparency.
President Arafat will be meeting the Council of Ministers next week.
This will be a good opportunity to address the need to take similarly courageous steps to improve the Palestinian administration and to bolster the rule of law.
The Commission is actively involved in those efforts.
The Commission has also stepped up its planned support for regional cooperation projects between Israelis and Arabs.
We committed more than EUR 20 million for such projects last year.
This package included renewed assistance for people-to-people activities and cross-border cooperation where Israelis and Arabs meet on non-governmental and expert levels.
Members will recall that the European Union is the largest financial donor to the overall efforts in bringing reconciliation to the people of the Middle East.
A number of issues naturally emerge as additional potential targets of Community support in the coming phase of the peace process - among them, helping to consolidate a Golan settlement both in terms of contributing to security arrangements and supporting demining and the rebuilding of communities in the Golan Heights.
Syrian economic development will need assistance for the transition from a wartime to a peace economy.
Reconstruction and rehabilitation of southern Lebanon, the only Middle Eastern area with an ongoing military conflict, will also demand considerable efforts. We also need to continue our support for economic reform and social development in Lebanon as a whole.
A solution is needed to the Palestinian refugee problem - these are the largest group of refugees in the world, numbering nearly 5 million people - an indication of the enormous challenges ahead.
We must support initiatives increasing the availability and improving the distribution and management of the region's very scarce water resources.
Lastly, but maybe most importantly, we are encouraging closer regional cooperation in a number of areas, bringing all the countries concerned together in a joint endeavour to address their common problems.
It is already apparent that the financial resources currently available for Community assistance to this part of the world will not be sufficient for the magnitude of support that will be required in the event of permanent peace.
I want to underline that point.
I wish insistently to remind the Council and, should it be necessary, Parliament, that we should not continue to allow a gap to develop between our rhetoric and what we are actually capable of doing.
I repeat that a change in the politics of the Middle East will require a gear change in the support that we shall be asked and expected to provide. I hope I can add that we will want to provide that.
We have made progress in recent months and weeks, as Mr Gama mentioned earlier.
But it is inevitably going to be a tough process with difficulties and disappointments on the way.
We will do all we can to help the process to a successful conclusion and to meet the obligations and challenges that will be created by that outcome.
Lastly, I will repeat for some who have entered the Chamber in the last few minutes, what I said at the outset of my remarks: that I will not be able to stay until the end of the debate, largely as a result of having assumed that the debate was taking place this morning and having fixed a meeting on the Balkans for this evening.
I hope the House will understand that.
Mr President, Commissioner Patten has our understanding.
I would like to tell him that communications with Madrid are usually more fluid and, therefore, I hope to see him there soon.
The statements we have heard today on the Middle East peace process are very opportune at the moment because of the hurried tour which Minister Gama - whose absence from this debate I also regret - has made of the region, accompanied by other Council representatives.
The tone of the news in the media on the recent events in the area could lead us to take a pessimistic view of the situation.
I honestly believe that an evaluation of this type would not be in accordance with the reality of that situation.
In this sense, I share Commissioner Patten' s positive attitude.
Let me explain: it is true that the Israeli Government has delayed the third hand-over of West Bank territory to the Palestinian authorities.
It is also true, however, that, since the signing of the Sharm el-Sheikh agreements, 39% of the territory of the West Bank has been handed over to the Palestinian National Authority, together with two thirds of the Gaza Strip and, more importantly, this agreement has so far been scrupulously complied with, since, under the terms laid down in Sharm el-Sheikh, the Israeli Government has the right to delay that handover.
