I should also just like to draw Mr Dell' Alba' s attention to what the founding fathers of the European Union dreamed of. Take a look at Jean Monet' s memoirs.
What he envisaged was what he called a small, practical secretariat.
That is not what Mr Prodi is President of today.
Madam President, this morning the Commission President, Mr Prodi, has set out ambitious goals for the European Union for the next five years, laudable aims indeed, to make a strong and effective European presence felt in the world: succeeding with enlargement, meeting the challenge of selling e-Europe, introducing better principles of governance.
We accept that Europeans, particularly the younger generation, need to be given a broad perspective of where Europe will be in the years ahead.
But how are we to succeed when the resources available are limited and the credibility of our institutions is not very high?
We need to match this vision with reality.
Here there are three elements I would like to contribute.
Firstly, we need a successful European economy.
We must ensure that unemployment rates continue to go down across Europe, confirm the trend in privatisation and deregulation, encourage the insertion of information technology and knowledge of the Internet, show that e-Europe is a good initiative.
But we must avoid lurching back into the old-style regulation, stifling individual initiative and enterprise.
We must not fear globalisation, but we must also make sure that we understand its political impact in the network society.
Without a successful European economy we cannot meet the challenges ahead, particularly of enlargement.
Secondly, we need to ensure that we legislate only when necessary - subsidiarity.
Doing less but better - a central plank of the last Commission - needs to be the aim of this Commission too.
We will be looking at this closely when we come to the annual programmes of proposed legislation.
Mr Bonde was right to say that there is this image of doing less better and then suddenly we see an annual programme for the year 2000 of 500 proposals and recommendations, which seems to go in a different direction.
We must establish priorities and make sure there is value for money in each of these programmes.
Lastly, we need to ensure that there is proper, genuine reform of the European Commission.
Yes, the Commission - guardian of the Treaties - is meant to be an independent body, but it also has to be accountable to European citizens through our Parliament.
The information problem, which Mr Bonde just referred to, is treated like a straw in the wind, with the Commission seeming to restrict information to us, as citizens and as parliamentarians, although we have the right to it under the Treaties.
The Commission is not in fact today a European government.
The Commission does not reflect the majority in this particular Parliament.
We in Parliament have a major role to play in the shaping of governance in Europe.
This governance therefore needs to be a sensitive governance so that we can actually work together and understand that each of the institutions in the European Union, has its relevant role to play.
Therefore we need to have credibility, coherence and confidence that in working together we can restore the image of the European Union to our citizens.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, numerous steps have been taken in the past to strengthen the European Union, from the euro to resolutions on a common security policy; even to the response by the 14, the Commission and Parliament to the new coalition in Austria.
I fully endorse the philosophy and the principles behind these decisions.
Nonetheless, I agree with you, Mr President of the Commission, that many more steps to strengthen the European Union will be needed in the future because the European Union is not strong enough either to master the huge, inevitable task of enlargement or to control current and potential movements which, to put it mildly, have an ambivalent attitude towards European values of democracy and tolerance and the desire to integrate all the people on our continent.
That does not apply to Austria alone.
The Union professes its faith in its fundamental values in the Treaty of Amsterdam and the institutions of the EU confirmed this faith once again when the new coalition was formed in Austria.
However, the full potential of these values will only be realised if they are set out in comprehensive detail in and form part of the Treaty and, in the final analysis, represent legal claims on the part of individual citizens.
When it comes down to it, Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty are not enough.
In this sense, the Commission must insist, and I should like to endorse and confirm this here, that the new Charter of Fundamental Rights become part of the Treaty and create binding, enforceable rights.
In this sense, the Commission must insist on building up the common area of freedom, security and justice and in this sense I disagree with the last two speakers.
Only reasonable, feasible and humane principles of immigration and asylum law can counter the irrational, misleading and demagogic allegations of the extreme right.
But, and I would like to stress this, this policy must also be accompanied by a coherent and convincing policy to promote employment and prevent social exclusion because unemployment, marginalisation and growing inequality are the best breeding grounds for anti-European, nationalistic actions and reactions.
In this respect, Mr President of the Commission, I too should like to address the issue of globalisation which you speculated on and how it is perceived by large segments of the population.
The feeling of being at the mercy of others, of lacking in influence and of having no protection from the state leads in the best case scenario to a lack of interest in politics and a refusal to vote, as in the European elections and, in the worst case scenario, to extremist voting patterns.
The Union, like everyone else, has not yet understood how to present the EU to the citizens of the EU as a means of protection against the negative effects of globalisation.
We are in the process of building a house but too few of our citizens really feel at home in our house.
What we need are not just reforms of the World Trade Organisation and the economic architecture - and, significantly, the President of the Commission forgot to mention the reform of the financial institutions and international financial architecture; we also need confidence-building measures for our citizens, who rightly expect help and support from and in the EU with the inevitable and painful process of adapting to new global circumstances.
In this respect, what the Commission says about boosting Europe' s voice is important.
You yourself, Mr President, spoke of a model of which, unfortunately, there is little mention in the document. You said that we must offer our citizens a model of economic, social, cultural and ecological development, both internally and towards the outside world, which differs from other models, including the US model.
In this sense, the USA is not only our partner; it is also our competitor; not our opponent, our competitor and we must fight to see which of us offers our citizens the best model.
I hope that what we have said so clearly and vehemently here today will also be reinforced in the Commission documents.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, the greatest legacy which your Commission could pass on to the European Union would be to help resettle and redistribute the increasingly jumbled and confused powers and competences of the Commission, and perhaps of the Union itself.
You have made a bold start by rightly emphasising the need to focus on so-called "core tasks".
That, as you have said yourself today, means that you must also identify tasks, policies and programmes which are peripheral or irrelevant to the Commission's main vocation.
Many existing European Union policies and programmes may simply have passed their sell-by date, or have been proved unwieldy or ineffective when administered at European level.
The challenge now is to have the courage to devolve as many non-core tasks as possible back to lower levels of national, regional and local government.
If we are to succeed in persuading a sceptical European public of the merits of further European integration, we must be able to demonstrate that we are as active in the devolution of unwarranted EU powers as we are in the evolution of new EU powers.
We must not allow the critics of European integration to claim, as they presently do with some justification as we have just heard from Mr Bonde, that the increase in EU responsibilities is a one-way street only.
It must be shown to be a two-way process in which existing EU policies and programmes, which are not clearly justified on the grounds of subsidiarity and proportionality, are devolved and repealed.
If you are able to match these aspirations with actions in the years ahead, you will be making an unprecedented contribution to the future of the European Union as a whole and, as we have heard today, you will enjoy widespread support in this European Parliament.
Madam President, you spoke about fundamental political values, and one of the fundamental political values, even more important than democracy, is respect for others.
We therefore feel that you acted correctly in sending a message and that perhaps those who protested about it are still feeling the effects of Bolshevism or Nazism. Democracy means dialogue with others and making others realise when they are wrong, but also listening to their explanations.
Enlargement - and Alleanza Nazionale has been repeating this for ten years in this House - must not mean dilution, that is, it must not entail more risks.
The applicant countries' hopes are at least as important as the hopes of our current fellow citizens, who are beginning to feel bitterly disappointed by the way Europe works, as it is not resolving the most serious problems.
We therefore need to be strict in the enlargement process and respect those agreements which - should it be necessary - need to be redrafted with regard to certain fundamental issues such as the environmental disaster that has occurred in Romania, reaching as far as Belgrade, but above all, the continuing spread of apathy as regards major security issues.
Even today, we do not have definite answers regarding the monitoring of the nuclear power stations in the eastern republics.
We therefore need resources available to spend before proceeding to enlargement, so that we can at last establish a European monitoring body responsible for monitoring quality of life and living conditions, with the aim of creating a new world where such tragedies will no longer occur.
I would also like to say a few words on Africa, Madam President.
The third and fourth worlds have been abandoned: just one dollar, one and a half euro would be enough to save a great many children.
Europe, which is so democratic, so progressive, does not speak out or take these tragic problems on board, while half of Africa is dying of Aids and other diseases.
One final remark regarding the Internet and globalisation.
Globalisation of the economy must not be reduced to product and quality certification, just as the globalisation of politics must not come to mean levelling of values or dampening of hopes and enthusiasm.
The peoples which do not participate and gradually grow more distant will leave the way open for an oligarchy that will take power and leave control in the hands of a few.
As for the Internet, Europe has finally found the courage to say that we need rules.
On a personal note, please allow me at this time to congratulate the pirates who, by acting the way they are, are forcing the world to reflect on the only system which is currently unregulated.
We live in a world of rules and regulations: let us regulate the Internet too and give our fellow citizens rules and hope for the future.
Madam President, as a Padanian taxpayer, I have already experienced the vice-like grip of the taxman and former Prime Minister of Italy, Mr Prodi, since Padania is liable to Italy for its taxes as well.
Listening to him just now, I was concerned when he mentioned new resources, something that readily translates as additional taxation, in view, inter alia, of enlargement, that is the entry of new States into the Union.
But why do they not buy their own entrance ticket?
My Padanian electorate who, thanks to Mr Prodi, have already paid what in Italy is known as the European tax - repaid only in part - have absolutely no intention, thanks once again to Mr Prodi, of paying another tax for someone else.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Members of the Commission, five months after its coming into office, the Commission committed to paper the direction in which it aims to steer the European Union.
The ensuing document is both ambitious and bombastic.
Is it not rather melodramatic to say that "the world looks up to Europe" ?
Moreover, Europe as a continent is a great deal more than just the fifteen EU Member States.
It is not rather ambitious to ensure peace, democracy and human rights in the whole of Europe, no less?
I am particularly intrigued by how the Commission considers bringing this about.
Does "the European integration model as a rich source for global administration" imply the export of a large-scale perspective and concentration of power?
According to the Commission, external policy can succeed, provided everyone knows exactly who is in charge!
So who is this then?
The Commission as a whole, its President perhaps, the Council?
You stated that the new European government requires strong institutions, while the Commission wants to focus at the same time on its core tasks.
We could not agree more with the latter.
It is high time that institutions restricted their scope to actual cross-border issues and stopped decking out the European cart with powers which they are taking away from national authorities.
The document mentions common values on different occasions.
Unfortunately, I find the reference to the relevant standards to be lacking.
This raises the question as to what these standards and values are based on.
I am convinced that the Bible, God' s word, is the only pure source of proper standards and real values.
In the tradition of our continent, this realisation is an important one which merits recognition.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, I am not sure which to go by: the strategic objectives for 2000 to 2005 or your speech for 2000 to 2010?
Have you already included your second term of office?
But seriously.
As it enlarges, the Union needs to be strengthened through streamlining and demarcation.
First, streamlining.
What you say in your programme about concentrating on the core functions of the Commission is only the beginning.
The activities of the entire Union must be reduced to core areas of policy.
In other words, a social, ecologically-orientated market, a secure currency, guaranteed civil rights internally and representation of common interests externally.
It is not just that we need to speak out in the world with one voice; it is what we want to say with this voice that it is important.
Secondly, the new "in" word is flexibility.
However, increasing flexibility can or quickly threatens to turn into intergovernmentalisation.
We must hold fast to joint decision-making institutions which embrace the Member States.
That also applies to the inclusion of the civil society, which is a welcome step.
Our citizens do not need any new institutions and certainly no new mixing of powers.
(Applause)
Transparency does not mean more access to more paper; to our citizens, transparency means greater clarity at long last as to who takes decisions in Brussels and Strasbourg, when and with what right.
That is transparency.
Thirdly, the European Union cannot and should not enlarge endlessly.
Its borders are set not by how may countries want to join, but by how many countries it can accommodate.
(Applause)
If the price of enlargement is the watering-down or even the break-up of the present Union, then it must not be paid.
It is too high a price, not only for the Member States already in the Union but also for the states which want to join the Union.
There is no future for a Union which is merely a geo-strategic concept or for a Union which is merely a free trade zone.
But the Union will only continue to be more than a market and to be accredited by the people of Europe if it sees itself as a community of destinies.
That goes far beyond your new economic and social agenda or a new, better quality of life.
Not only the Commission, not only the European Parliament but also the people and the states in our European Union will have to find new answers to the question of how and why we want to live and work together.
In doing so, we need, no less, to reinvent the European Union, but without destroying the present Union.
(Applause)
Madam President, in the opinion of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party, the most important task of the Commission and the whole Union in the coming years is the successful realisation of enlargement.
The Commission must carry on negotiations that are a decisive attempt to have each applicant country join the Union as soon as possible.
On the other hand, we have to see to it that none of the achievements or aims of integration that have been stated thus far are watered down.
To avoid this the European Liberal Democrats have expressed the hope that the Intergovernmental Conference will consider the various models of differentiated integration and create a concentric Union, in which there is a federal core and a less integrated outer ring.
It is clear that the subject of the internal differentiation of the Union will be raised at the IGC.
The subject needs to be discussed without prejudice.
A technical improvement in the flexibility system will not be enough: we also have to raise the issue of developing our institutions for the countries in the vanguard as proposed by Jacques Delors, for example.
In this way, a decision-making system can be created that is more effective, clearer, more open and more democratic.
I hope that the Commission will make its own proposal concerning how the expanding Union might implement its institutional and other differentiation.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, your inspiring speech, Mr Prodi, has quite won me over.
It raises expectations, but it can also lead to disappointment.
This is connected to what Mr Van Velzen was just saying, about the difference between words and deeds.
The enlargement of the Union is inspired by our wish for peace, security and stability.
You are looking to reassure the acceding countries, as well as European opinion.
But these days, we are witnessing the exact reverse before our very eyes.
We have noted increasing levels of apprehension and disquiet, even within regions where unemployment is quite low and prosperity very high.
We need to make our citizens feel at home, according to Mr Swoboda, and I agree.
This is a place where we share the same values and where each and one of us also have our own task and responsibility.
This is probably linked to the standards mentioned by Mr Van Dam, namely subsidiarity.
It is necessary to have a clear division of responsibility among all levels of authority and to be partners, rather than competitors when it comes to policy.
It is also necessary to exercise authority as closely as possible to the citizens, where it can be exercised with due transparency and can be monitored by the citizens themselves.
That will require a new political culture, not only in words, but also in practice, which will take into consideration the reality of Member States and regions.
Regions which, culturally and economically, sometimes match the interest of some Member States.
The new Europe should not only expand horizontally, but also vertically, by living by our values in practice and by developing a democratic structure of a real community.
This is what the Commission will be judged on.
Madam President, the Commission is today presenting its strategic objectives for 2000-2005. These are contained in an extremely general document in which all the problems have been glossed over to prevent any conflict.
So, in the first part on the new forms of European governance, the words 'federalism' and 'superstate' are not mentioned at all.
Yet these are the main themes in any discussion of strong European institutions in which only day-to-day tasks of execution are decentralised and a collective vision is promoted within an indistinct whole. In this scenario the governments and national parliaments are merged with the regional and even local authorities and with the civil society, all of which are described, with no form of hierarchy, as 'integral elements of European governance' .
These ambiguities mask many misunderstandings, primarily about our values.
