I hope and wish, and am indeed certain, that the European Union, with maturity and with the measures it has begun to adopt, will little by little construct, in the wider area, the necessary environment which it needs itself.
Let us not deceive ourselves: a Europe, one part of which is being held back because of frictions, misinterpretations and conflicts, and because of nationalistic clashes, will never be a Europe that has brought its own house to the level it wants.
In any event, speaking now as a Greek, I want to tell some of the speakers I listened to earlier that much of what was said is fixated on other times and places.
They have quite failed to grasp the new conditions created in the area; the new and positive conditions which have been created, in very many cases on Greece' s initiative.
You should know that the country which cooperates most with FYROM and has the best relations with it, in the entire area, is Greece, and this has contributed greatly to the stability of the area.
I say this just so that we know where we stand.
. This has been a very interesting general debate about the Balkans as a whole.
It was none the worse for that, but perhaps I will be forgiven for concentrating very largely on the report because there are some extremely important issues that I want to touch on.
I am delighted to be able to be able to set out the Commission's position on the report.
It is very helpful.
It is an excellent contribution by Mr Swoboda and his colleagues.
We are very grateful for his leadership on this issue and for that of some of his colleagues, a number of whom are in the House this evening - Mrs Pack, Mr Lagendijk and others.
I am very pleased that at our overall relations with FYROM are in such a good state.
Perhaps Mr Dupuis will forgive me for using that expression - both he and his interpreter - in the spirit of entente cordiale.
That has been helped by our excellent European Union representative in the country.
He has been a great friend to Parliament and a great servant of the Commission.
The imminent commencement of negotiations on a stabilisation and association agreement is the most powerful example of our good relations.
So to is the cooperation of FYROM in the rebuilding of Kosovo.
I am grateful to the authorities in Macedonia for their assistance in recent weeks in helping to cope with the considerable difficulties with the power supply in Kosovo.
Like honourable Members I recognise the stabilising role that this country has played during the Balkan tragedy, in particular when it comes to integrating the Albanian minority into the political and social life of the country.
I saw the newly-elected President Georgievski a few weeks ago and I was extremely impressed, as others have been, by his commitment to multi-ethnicity and pluralism.
Let me set out where matters now stand on these negotiations to which - as Mr Lagendijk said - other countries in the region are looking with very considerable interest.
The Council adopted on 24 January this year its negotiating directives for a stabilisation and association agreement with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
This represents the most important step forward in the stabilisation and association process of the western Balkans region initiated by the Commission in May 1999.
Let me make clear the main elements of those draft directives.
They cover the inclusion in the agreement of arrangements establishing a political dialogue with FYROM.
They cover provisions for enhanced regional cooperation including the prospect of establishing free trade areas between the countries of the region, though I must make it clear that there is no question of any attempt to recreate the state of Yugoslavia.
They cover the prospect of the establishment of a free trade area between the European Union and them within ten years of the entry into force of the agreement.
They cover provisions on the movement of workers, freedom of establishment, supply of services, current payments and movement of capital.
They cover a commitment by FYROM to approximate its legislation to that of the European Community, notably in key areas of the internal market; and they cover provisions on cooperation with FYROM in a wide range of fields, including justice and home affairs.
We are now making in the Commission the necessary preparations so that negotiations can start in March.
I am due to visit FYROM in the second week in March.
I hope to be able to set the process in motion then, although the formal negotiations will start very shortly thereafter.
At the time of that visit I will also, as recommended by honourable Members and others, be upgrading our representation in FYROM.
The target date for concluding the negotiations is December this year but this will depend to a very large extent on the goodwill and determination of the negotiators.
The agreement could enter into force in three to four years from now, given the time needed for ratification in Member States' parliaments.
I should like to comment very briefly on a number of other points in the draft resolution.
We accept that the agreement should to a certain extent serve as an example for other such agreements, although obviously we will also want to take account of the fact that we are dealing with different countries, each of which has its own identity and its own concerns.
I share the wide-spread concern that we should treat each country on its merits and not shackle everyone to the pace of the slowest in the development of relations with the Union.
That has never been the intention.
The very fact that negotiations are beginning first with FYROM, before all the others, is evidence that we can and do differentiate.
On the provision of regional aid referred to in the report we agree that our technical and financial assistance should go in part to projects having a cross-border or regional dimension.
We agree that there should be an evolutionary clause on the prospect of EU membership contained in the stabilisation and association agreement.
It will reflect the European Union's position on its relations with the countries of the western Balkans as set out in the Cologne European Council conclusions.
We strongly agree on the need to decentralise our assistance programmes to the maximum possible extent.
As for the arrangements covering European Union assistance to the western Balkans, Members will be aware that we are drawing up a new regulation to simplify and streamline their management and to put everything under one regulation.
I am aware that there is concern in FYROM and elsewhere at the end of the PHARE programme in these countries and, especially, at the loss of association with the PHARE name.
I note with considerable concern what Members say on this score.
I will take another look at the issue, although I should point out that having two PHARE programmes up and running risks real confusion.
I want to stress, however, that whatever the programme is called, our commitment to the integration of FYROM and its neighbours into the European family is stronger than ever.
In general I trust that Members of this House will share my pleasure that Macedonia has reached this stage relatively rapidly.
I hope that the other countries of the region will redouble their efforts to make similar progress.
I look forward to many similar debates to this over the next few years marking, I hope, the success of what we are trying to do in the Balkans which, for me, remains the single most important litmus-test of what Europe is able to do on its own doorstep.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 p.m.
Agreement on comitology
The next item is the report (A5-0021/2000) by Mrs Frassoni, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on the implementation of the new Council decision of 28 June 1999 on comitology (1999/468/EC).
. (IT) Mr President, the approval of this agreement with the Commission on procedures for implementing the Council decision on comitology marks the end of a saga which has kept Parliament busy for two years, along with a few enthusiasts scattered among the various institutions of the Union, whom many people do not hesitate to call masochists.
Until 1993, the way the Commission exercised its executive powers, and in particular the mysterious and even suspect committee arrangements, was creating conflict and mistrust between the institutions, and threatening to have serious consequences on the legislative procedure.
That is why, in accordance with Declaration No 31, annexed to the Treaty of Amsterdam, the Union institutions have undertaken a complex task of negotiation and consultation, resulting in the new Council decision, which revises the old system quite substantially, although we are not entirely satisfied with it.
In particular, the decision outlines a form of parliamentary control whereby Parliament can sound the alarm if an implementing measure, deriving from an act adopted under the codecision procedure, oversteps the implementing powers delegated to the Commission.
During the protracted interinstitutional negotiations - which saw Parliament actively involved, thanks to the work of the rapporteur, Adelaide Aglietta - it was understood that the European Parliament and Commission would conclude an interinstitutional agreement on the procedures for implementing certain aspects of the new decision. On the one hand, certain points which the Council did not intend to incorporate into the decision were to be made explicit and, on the other, the system for providing information about implementing measures and monitoring them was to be organised more precisely.
During the trialogue held on 6 October 1999 in Strasbourg, the Presidents of the European Parliament and the Commission approved the idea of concluding this agreement soon.
We believe we have respected that commitment, and indeed this was made relatively easy by the climate of trust and mutual respect evident throughout the negotiations with the Commission.
Essentially, the agreement deals with two points: one is the right of the European Parliament to be informed, which is the sine qua non for the genuine exercise of its right to intervene pursuant to Article 8 of the decision.
Hitherto, such information had been supplied on paper and unsystematically, and was of no use to our services; and indeed this was often the fault of Parliament itself.
From now on, the information will be provided by means of an electronic system called CIRCA, to which the European Parliament will have access. This represents a real innovation, not only for us, but also - I am sure - for the Commission.
The other point is that Article 8 of the Council decision does not specify either the method by which the European Parliament is to sound the alarm, or the time limit within which it must exercise its restricted power of control.
Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the agreement confirm that, as a general rule, the European Parliament will adopt its resolution, stating its reasons, at a plenary sitting and has one month to exercise its right of intervention before the Commission adopts the draft implementing measure.
But we all realise that it is not always possible to wait a month before implementing a measure.
Therefore, the agreement contains explicit provisions on urgent procedure, including possible action by the committee responsible.
I want to end by stressing that we cannot assess whether this is a good agreement or not, we must wait and see how it works in practice.
The European Parliament needs to acquire the resources, which it currently lacks, to ensure efficient monitoring of implementing measures, and the Commission must accept that some of its practices need reorganising to provide proper information to Parliament and ensure that control can be effective.
Finally, it needs to be borne in mind that - whatever happens - the real solution to the problems of comitology for the European Parliament is still to change the procedure for implementing legislation laid down in the Treaties, and gradually to dismantle the committees whose existence represents an anomaly that severely restricts the Commission' s executive power and may prejudice the European Parliament' s legislative powers.
Mr President, comitology is a concept most people do not know how to handle and hardly anyone knows what it means.
It makes them think of secret societies and conspiracies, which is the way things used to be.
In fact, it implies nothing other than fixing the procedures for the exercise of the implementing powers conferred on the Commission.
The procedures for exercising these implementing powers take the form of a limited number of committee procedures.
Up until the Amsterdam Treaty, there were about 20 variations of these committee procedures, which created neither clarity in the implementation of legislation nor transparency for the citizens.
On the contrary, for a long time even the European Parliament was not informed.
For the European Parliament, the first step in the struggle for more transparency in this jungle of committees was to be informed, at least, of all that the European Commission intended to regulate in the context of these various committees.
Agreement was reached in 1988 in the form of an exchange of letters between Lord Plumb and Mr Delors.
A further step towards transparency and the involvement of the European Parliament came with what is known as the modus vivendi of 20 September 1994, which granted Parliament the right not only to be informed but also to intervene in certain cases.
It also gave it the possibility of scrutiny.
With the Amsterdam Treaty, the situation improved decidedly when the number of committee procedures was drastically reduced - as the European Parliament had long wanted - to three procedures, the administrative procedure, the regulatory procedure and the advisory procedure.
Now, following the Amsterdam Treaty, the rights of information and control granted to the European Parliament in the past need to be enshrined anew in an interinstitutional agreement.
Mrs Frassoni, our rapporteur, has done very careful work and identified the questions that have to be clarified in the context of that interinstitutional agreement and the administrative procedures that may have to be changed within Parliament.
A key problem is the time factor.
When the European Parliament is informed, it generally has to adopt a position within the very short timeframe of four weeks, should it so wish.
In matters relating to the health and safety of the people of the European Union, the European Commission, as guardian of the Treaties and the only institution with the right of initiative, must be in a position to react very rapidly, if necessary within a few hours or days.
Nevertheless, the European Parliament must retain the right to be informed and where appropriate also to react.
Our rapporteur identifies very useful solutions to these difficulties, which I and my group can only support in full.
I just have one more request.
In the German version, paragraph 2 of the resolution has been translated rather misleadingly and I urgently ask for clarification, which I would also like to see in the printed version later.
In my view, instead of "weitergefÌhrt werden mÌssen" the wording should be "erhalten bleiben mÌssen" .
The German version is not very clear here.
I would ask for that to be checked again.
For the rest, I warmly thank our rapporteur.
It is a difficult subject and I hope we have managed to make it somewhat easier to deal with now.
Mr President, I congratulate the rapporteur on her report.
I must add that it is a welcome change to see Mrs Frassoni in such a conciliatory mood and willing to reach compromises with the other institutions.
When it comes to the IGC, she is one of what the French call "les pures et dures" : no compromise, no deals with the other institutions; we would rather see the whole thing blocked than compromise our positions.
Yet here she is willing to accept the steps forward that have been achieved, which are far from matching Parliament' s original position on the issue of comitology.
Let us remember what is at stake here.
Parliament had four main criticisms of the comitology system as it existed prior to the new Council decision supplemented by this interinstitutional agreement.
Firstly, the whole system is obscure.
It is not transparent with hundreds of committees meeting with secret agendas and nobody knowing who is on the committees.
Here is a real step forward, in the new system that has been agreed.
We are to know who is on each committee.
We are to know when they meet.
We are to get the agendas.
We are to get the documents that are sent to them.
The whole system will be more open and transparent - if still rather complex.
So that is at least a step forward.
Our second criticism is that the system was very restrictive of the Commission.
We adopt legislation in the European Union.
We expect the Commission to implement it.
And then we have a system designed to hinder the Commission and make it more difficult - especially what was called the "contre-filet" system, under which the Council could block the Commission by a simple majority even when the Council was not capable of finding an alternative to the implementing measure concerned.
Here too there is at least some progress.
The Council will no longer be able to block implementing measures indefinitely beyond the three-month period unless it has a qualified majority to block it, in other words, unless there is substantial opposition among the Member States represented in the Council.
That is a more reasonable system.
That, too, is a step forward.
But on our other two criticisms, we are less satisfied.
The first criticism is of the system whereby the Commission is monitored, scrutinised, controlled if you like, only by a committee appointed by Member States or the Council not by Parliament.
The legislative authority, Council and Parliament, should be equal.
We confer implementing powers on the Commission, but then it is only a Council or Member State appointed body that can blow the whistle and say no to the Commission and stop the implementing measure.
Parliament has no equivalent power.
True, we are now given the beginning of such a power in this new system.
We are to receive all the draft implementing measures forwarded to a committee at the same time as it is sent to the committee.
We will have the chance to scrutinise, to debate, to question.
But we will only have the right to formally challenge the Commission if we think it has gone beyond the delegation that we have given to the Commission in the legislation.
In other words, we can challenge the measure for being ultra-vires but not on its content.
And in a democracy, Parliament should be able to challenge the content.
Not that we do so every week.
We are not seeking to immerse ourselves in implementing decisions, but it is a democratic safeguard that we should be able to do so on those few occasions when it really would be necessary.
That is lacking in this new system, or at least is only there in embryonic form.
Finally, our fourth criticism is that if an implementing measure is blocked through the comitology system it is referred back, not to both branches of the legislative authority, but to the Council alone, which has the right possibly to take an alternative measure.
That is not correct.
Both branches adopt the legislation - Council and Parliament - that confers implementing powers on the Commission.
If such implementing measures are referred back, it should be to both branches, not to one branch alone.
Overall we have a system which has made some progress.
The supplementary aspects that arise from the interinstitutional agreement with the Commission are welcome, but that could not change the basic decision of the Council.
Even here, we have renounced voluntarily - because this did not happen automatically - the Plumb-Delors agreement as part of the overall compromise.
We have been willing to relinquish the provisions in that.
We shall have to be very vigilant on what used to be covered by that agreement and is not fully covered by the new decision.
We must be very vigilant.
So it is a step forward.
My group reluctantly accepts it as a step forward.
We are not as enthusiastic about compromising as Mrs Frassoni.
