Mr President, everyone who has travelled here by car, train or aeroplane, has been able to see the extent of the damage, particularly in France, caused by hurricanes of a completely unprecedented violence which struck Europe at the end of last month.
What can the Members of the European Parliament do when faced with such a widespread disaster?
Firstly, I would like to pay tribute to the mayors and local representatives who, on a daily basis, have had to reassure their constituents, organise volunteers and cooperate with the public services.
They have earned the confidence of their fellow-citizens.
Next, I would like to thank the emergency services and the armed forces of the Union' s Member States who, in a fine example of intergovernmental cooperation, came to support the efforts of their French colleagues.
I would also like to consider the paradoxical situation we have with regard to emergency aid.
If this disaster had taken place in Guatemala or Turkey, we could have immediately used the Community budget to help the victims, but in our own countries nothing of the kind is possible because there is no suitable budget line with which to do so.
We must also ask the Commission not to prevent local authorities and individual States from coming to the assistance of businesses affected by the disaster by applying Community competition rules too strictly.
I am thinking in particular here of fish and shellfish companies, which have been particularly badly hit.
As you said, Commissioner, we must ensure that there is compensation for the forced cessation in activity and that appeals can be made to FIFG for investments that have been totally wiped out.
Beyond this, I think that implementing MAGPs in a mechanical way will no longer be appropriate in the coastal regions that have been affected.
I therefore ask the Commission to stop doing so and, on the contrary, to help those who make their living from the sea to proceed to new investments, which they urgently need.
Mr President, the storms which devastated France during the night between 26 and 27 December have caused, as has been said, 90 deaths and damage to a value of FF 75 billion, i.e. EUR 11 billion.
Almost three weeks after the disaster, several thousand people were still without electricity and telephones, 500 000 hectares of forestry land, or 100 million cubic metres of forest, have been ruined, and our historical heritage has also been affected, as the sad example of the park at the Palace of Versailles demonstrates.
It seems quite natural that given such a disaster, national and European solidarity should go to the help of the devastated regions and those people who have been worst affected.
As the previous speakers have said, and as you said, Commissioner, in response to my fellow Member, Mr Martinez, with regard to another tragedy, the floods in November in the Southwest of France, you have certainly noted these disasters with concern, but all you are doing is pointing out that the budget line for emergency appropriations for natural disasters has been discontinued, which has resulted in this shocking paradox. This paradox, pointed out by the previous speaker, is that it is easier, a great deal easier, to offer help to victims of natural disasters outside the Union than within it.
We know full well that what you are doing, Commissioner, and that is, limiting yourself to giving us the hypothetical and remote possibility of benefiting from the Structural Funds of the new Objective 2 or from the provisional Objectives 2 or 5b.
These are the terms of the written answer you gave Mr Martinez on 11 January 2000.
I can show you a copy if you wish.
We would understand completely if you were not able to say anything else given the irresponsible attitude not only of the Commission, but also of this Parliament, and if you cannot do anything because there is no legal or financial framework for doing so.
But for pity' s sake, and I am not saying this to you in an aggressive way, please do not present appropriations which have previously been earmarked under an unrelated regional policy as aid for victims of the storms.
As a matter of urgency, therefore, we must restore, within the framework of a supplementary budget, the budget line which was allocated to us for natural disasters.
We must use the Berlin Summit aid appropriations and we must change the forestry policy implemented in most countries in the Union. That, however, is another problem altogether.
Mr President, Commissioner, Europe has undergone a tough ordeal at the start of this millennium.
I would first like to express my heartfelt condolences to the families in mourning as a result of the appalling weather conditions that devastated Europe in December.
These storms were an unprecedented ecological disaster for our forests.
I hope you do not mind if I make particular mention of the forests in my region, Lorraine, which have suffered enormous destruction.
I would like to congratulate the regional authorities, the volunteers and the public services on the fantastic way in which they rallied round but, unfortunately, their troubles are not yet over.
It is Europe's duty to support them and thereby complement the efforts of the governments of Member States affected by the disaster.
I welcome Mr Barnier' s statement and I also welcome the measures which the Commission has announced.
I am certainly not forgetting the economic dimension of this matter, as the timber industry has been devastated and a whole population is suffering the tragic effects of this.
The Community action programme for civil protection, established by a Council decision on 9 December, was launched on 1 January 2000.
I ask Member States to grasp this opportunity. This programme must work at full capacity.
Although it may have been effective in certain areas - and I do not doubt the sincerity of Commissioner Barnier' s words - unfortunately it is still in its infancy when it comes to forestry.
Our priority, as we wait for Community-level funds to be freed up, is for material aid in terms of partnership exchanges between Member States.
It is therefore a matter of urgency to improve forest roads, and to repair them as quickly as possible.
Lending forestry equipment and making personnel qualified in forestry management available are also covered by this measure.
Our next challenge will be to prevent the occurrence of phytosanitary problems which could result from having to abandon large amounts of wood in the forest, and from the pollution of ground water through having to store such large quantities of wood.
Finally, it is essential that we slow down the logging of standing wood, in order to give priority to the purchase of windfalls.
These timber sales should be supported by strong media coverage in Member States.
This aid for gathering timber is, of course, only the first stage of an aid package, which will take the form of aid for reforestation and aid for the development of rural areas.
I ask the Commission to incorporate this into a study of how the situation should be managed now that the emergency is over.
This is a very sad opportunity for Europe to renew its forestry heritage in line with the role that this plays in wildlife and nature conservation and in our economies.
It is therefore a time for solidarity and cooperation between Member States in the face of an ecological and economic calamity.
If this solidarity is to have been worthwhile, it is up to Europe to propose priority actions for safeguarding the timber industry.
Hurricane "Lothar" should prompt us not to abide solely by the principle of undertaking repairs once the damage is done - something which is discussed at a very superficial level here -, but to switch to the precautionary principle, under the terms of which potential perpetrators are brought to book too.
Current programmes must be accelerated.
For example, as they stand, the Commission' s programmes will preclude us from meeting our obligations under Kyoto.
The trade in emissions rights is immoral to my mind and rather than solving the problem, it shelves it.
The entire taxation system must be given an environmental perspective in the medium term.
We must work more rapidly towards achieving the targets stipulated in the White Paper for renewable energy sources, as this would bring about a massive reduction in greenhouse gases.
The new Commission has not put forward nearly enough on this subject, and what it has put forward is woefully inadequate!
Commissioner, Mr President, Lothar was a quite ordinary name hitherto.
However, it has now achieved notoriety.
The hurricane of the same name swept across Europe claiming numerous victims, mainly in France and Germany, but also in Switzerland, leaving a trail of destruction in its wake.
The wind triumphed over electricity pylons, roofs, traffic signs and, ultimately over the forest.
We have heard that in a short space of time the storm left us with approximately 120 million cubic metres of solid timber, and this is only an estimate.
I have listened to you very attentively Commissioner, and welcome with open arms the fact that you are intending to go and see for yourself the effects the catastrophe has had in France and in Germany.
If Mrs Schreyer is to visit the Black Forest sometime in the next few days, then any one farmer might ask her how the Commission and Europe would be able to help him as an individual.
What would you say to the forestry manager if his enterprise happened not to be in an Objective 2 region, or in a 5b region?
What answer will the Commission give, when it is on the scene, when you tell the forestry worker that we support road construction and dam-building, and we want to rebuild our cultural heritage and create tourist attractions etc.? All this is well-intentioned advice.
However, I come from an area in Northern Germany where the forestry industry predominates and I can tell you that we are already feeling the effects of the immense damage.
The thinning-out we need is not being attended to; the forests are not being tended to the requisite degree.
What we need the Commission to do as a matter of urgency is to approve national aid, so as to avoid the competition issue being raised again at a later date.
Mr President, Commissioner, permit me, first of all, to make reference to two facts.
Firstly, at the beginning of 1999, NATO, with the participation of most Member States of the European Union, flattened Kosovo with bombs in the name of freedom.
We are now endeavouring, at huge cost, to get the country back on its feet again and help its people, and rightly so.
Secondly, at the end of 1999 unbelievable storms raged bringing death and destruction to vast tracts of the EU.
The Commission in Brussels responded to the victims' cries for help with a shrugging of shoulders.
"We do not have the wherewithal for that," they said.
This is wrong!
And no one can comprehend this attitude.
Certainly those who fear for their livelihood are at a complete loss.
The citizens of the European Union expect solidarity, also from within this Community.
I say they have a right to solidarity.
Indeed the European Parliament must make it its business to uphold this right in hours of need.
I urge the Commission not to keep having to be asked and to provide assistance for the victims of the storms.
It knows the ins and outs of aid provision better than any local organisation or authority.
I call upon you, ladies and gentlemen, to support me in bringing home to the Commission the fact that what most Brussels offices are lacking is not so much the wherewithal for providing aid as the good will.
Permit me one further comment. Although it was less evident in the case of the consequences of the storm, the tanker disaster off the French coast has made it very clear that we need to give the Commission a helping hand on another matter.
The European Union needs rules governing environmental liability as a matter of urgency.
We can no longer tolerate a situation where the general public has to foot the bill for damage that has often been caused by individuals involved in criminal machinations.
We must make the perpetrators liable for all manner of damage done to our environment.
Then, for example, people will think twice before transporting oil in a tanker that is about to fall apart.
When, in 1994, over five years ago that is, I joined the Legal Affairs Committee in this Parliament, I became rapporteur for the environmental liability dossier.
To this day I am still awaiting an initiative from the Commission, which will actually enable me to start work.
It is a scandalous state of affairs that must be ended with all haste, and I hope that February does not see this dossier being postponed yet again!
Mr President, Commissioner, the storms that took place at the turn of the millennium should galvanise us into thinking about certain problems.
It has become clear that mankind continues to be unable to avoid natural disasters.
There have always been natural disasters and there always will be.
Of course, there is a need for solidarity here.
There is certainly a need for European civil protection, and the EU budget must also provide for a budget line covering natural disasters.
But, most importantly, it is only ever man that makes the mistakes as far as the nature-mankind relationship is concerned - despite the fact that the same mistakes have often been made down through the centuries - and never nature, for nature cannot make mistakes.
The extent of the damage caused on this occasion was determined by the population density, the type of infrastructure, and, of course, the many monocultures, if we are talking forests.
Of course, I am in favour of providing assistance where we can.
But when it comes to aid, we ought to bear in mind that perhaps in future, more emphasis should be placed on laying electricity and telephone cabling underground.
We must take account of smaller cycles and plant stable mixed woodland when undertaking reforestation, rather than monocultures.
The most important subject for discussion in this context is the climate.
To this day, we in Europe remain in the privileged position of having the Gulf Stream, and the Gulf Stream still does its stuff.
America and south-east Asia are having a much worse time of it as far as climate and storms go.
We are fortunate in having the Gulf Stream.
But in common with others, we too are having to endure the greenhouse effect.
This is partly the work of human hand, as difficult as it is to demonstrate climate change using calculations.
We must take more account of the guidelines produced at the Kyoto environmental conference.
We must reduce CO2 emissions, employ renewable energies, and generally make enquiries, in this connection, as to how the forests of Europe are faring.
Mr President, I think we should firstly express our sorrow for the victims.
This is an irreparable loss.
Secondly, we welcome the solidarity between the French departments and citizens, and the solidarity of other countries with France, which is the country worst affected.
As I have little time, Mr President, I would like to touch upon two elements of our resolution.
I believe that the first one was implicitly recognised by the Commissioner in his speech when he wondered whether these catastrophes are natural or not.
That is to say that experts are ever more convinced that climate change and human activities, in general terms, are linked to the increase seen in natural disasters in recent years.
In fact, over the last decade, the temperature has risen more than in the rest of the century.
Therefore Europe must be clearly committed to the Kyoto Protocol and make specific proposals.
Secondly, I was rapporteur for civil protection in Europe and I completely agree with the Commissioner' s proposal to create a European civil protection body.
Furthermore, we should utilise an extraordinary budget line, since this is an extraordinarily catastrophic situation.
First of all, we would like to express sympathy with all the families and communities that lost members in this terrible tragedy.
It is really the loss of life that makes this particular disaster an extraordinary one by European standards.
It is regrettable that we do not have any instrument with which to give assistance in situations like this.
I want to thank the Commissioner for his comprehensive statement on the subject and his suggestion that we might indeed organise ourselves at European level to give assistance to Member States and regions that have tragedies like this.
That is important.
The other thing we should remember is that we did have a budget line in the past.
It was very small.
It was not able to do very much but it was repeatedly abused by Members of this House proposing action when the disasters were not even major.
Officials and ministers from Member States were coming to Brussels, whispering with the Commission and getting a few euros and making a political point by bringing aid back to their constituencies.
So there was not much sympathy for this budget line when it was abolished.
I think we should reinstate this budget line.
When we had the earthquake in Greece, which was a big disaster, the Community had no instrument with which to offer its sympathy or solidarity to the Greeks.
The same when the floods came in France and the same again now.
These are major disasters, we should have an instrument, we do not have it.
We should reinstate that instrument and we should make the rules tight so that only in situations where grave disasters occur will we call up this particular instrument.
We can save it from year to year and ensure that when something major happens we have an instrument to deal with it.
We did not have it so bad in Ireland this time although we have had many serious wind storms on the Atlantic.
We had floods in Ireland also and I want to express my sympathy with the people in Ireland who suffered from these.
Ladies and gentlemen, none of us must forget what has taken place.
It is true that there was a joint decision by the Council and Parliament seeking to discontinue emergency lines.
It is also true that there is a lot of European money around. Commissioner Barnier has pointed out that oyster farming and agriculture would be eligible under Article 30 of the regulation concerning rural development, forestry would be eligible under Article 33, companies would be eligible under exemptions from the competition law stated in Article 87(2) of the Treaty and public facilities would be eligible under the Structural Funds.
It is nevertheless the case that not a penny more than what was allocated before the storm will now be freed up to demonstrate practical, active solidarity.
It is nothing more than the States playing at taking from Peter in order to give to Paul.
This is inadequate, and I am personally delighted that Mr Barnier has stated an idea close to my heart and which, moreover, I expressed when I told the press in Bordeaux what I am hoping for, and that is the establishment of a reinforced policy of European civil security.
If the European citizenship that we all want to see is to come into being, if the mandate that our President, Mrs Fontaine has staked on a closer relationship between the Union and Europe' s citizens is to be effective, our citizens must be able to feel that we are acting with some urgency.
I therefore believe that a European civil protection force, real civil relief blue helmets, who would go to areas in difficulty within the Union, as we currently have no emergency procedure, but also outside the Union if needs be, in Venezuela or anywhere else, is something that we should hope to see. I would like to tell Commissioner Barnier that in me he has an active ally for this idea which strikes me as noble and truly European in spirit.
Mr President, Commissioner, when we compare the frequency with which storms occur in other parts of the world with our own situation, we see that Europe gets off relatively lightly.
Nevertheless, the storms that took place in the last week of December showed us what the consequences can be and that there are major problems in store for us.
Anyone travelling to Strasbourg by car or by rail would have been able to see for themselves that storms raged in Alsace as well.
I would therefore like to extend my sympathy to all those citizens in the regions where the storms raged so furiously, and at the same time, from my position here in this Chamber, point to how important it is to support these regions and people.
Each and every one of us knows that any other region of Europe could meet with just such a fate tomorrow.
What we need to do now is to deal with the fallen timber as swiftly as possible.
For it is common knowledge that we could have an even greater disaster on our hands if the fallen timber were to be left in the forests too long.
For instance, it should be pointed out that fallen timber provides the best breeding ground for the bark beetle' s larvae, and we are not yet in a position to assess the repercussions this will have.
That is why it is absolutely essential to deal with the fallen timber before the warmer weather arrives.
