I am thinking of transport policy and regional policy.
You have excellent Commissioners for both issues in Mrs Palacio and Mr Barnier, yet still you attach too little importance to these areas.
And do you know why?
Just look at transport policy; clearly it is crucial for this policy to be drawn up as a economically and ecologically sensible policy before the accession of other countries.
I would be grateful if the President of the Commission would listen to what I have to say, although of course he has no obligation to do so.
Let me give you three examples.
First: we need reasonable deregulation of the railway sector because we want to shift freight from the roads to the railways.
That makes sense from an economic and an ecological point of view.
Without deregulation we will not make any headway with a reasonable transport policy.
The same applies to European air traffic control.
Our citizens cannot understand that we are deregulating air traffic, but leaving 15 different sectors in the skies which are under national control, which have an adverse economic impact on the airlines and which pollute the environment.
You still have not finished that agenda.
Commissioner, far too little is said in your paper about regional policy.
Economic and social cohesion in the EU is a fundamental task of this Community.
If we fail to complete it, citizens in less favoured regions will dread enlargement.
We must show them that we intend to use the next five years to help them join the rich regions by promoting the less favoured regions using reasonable means.
Then they too will be prepared to really support enlargement and help to achieve it.
Mr President of the Commission, if we do not manage to create true solidarity between the rich and the poor regions, then this Union will be all the poorer and it will not meet with the approval of the people.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, the fact that we are formulating new programmes does not mean that we should neglect those older programmes which are at implementation stage.
From that standpoint, it is useful that the Commission' s work programme comes back to the issues of Agenda 2000, the common agricultural policy, which includes fishing, and secondly, the activities of the structural funds.
I hope this reference means that the reorganisation of the Commission currently in progress will not damage the mechanism for monitoring and implementing Agenda 2000.
The Agenda 2000 issues are, of course, ones that relate to your third and fourth strategic objectives, the economic and social Agenda and a better quality of life.
What your texts do not make apparent is the extent to which these major, high-minded objectives are compatible with the resources that the Commission intends to deploy.
I do not necessarily mean financial resources.
The implementation of Agenda 2000 in the agricultural sector does not ultimately require more money.
There must also be savings.
But what we need is the analytical resources: these issues require the investment of more intellectual capital.
This is because it is essential to achieve two things: the European model of multifunctionality in agriculture must be secured, and this must be done in a way which facilitates the liberalisation of world trade in agricultural products, mainly to the benefit of developing countries.
It is not easy to combine those aims. There is no obvious way.
There may well be contradictions between the two objectives and there is nothing to show that the Commission has pointed out those contradictions and how it proposes to deal with them.
As regards the other aspect of Agenda, the aspect of cohesion and regional development, there we do indeed have great achievements to point to, but there are still less developed regions, particularly island regions, to which more attention should be paid.
As for fishing, there is nothing in your programme to tell us that the predatory exploitation of fishing grounds, which has gone as far as to wipe out entire species of fish, will certainly prove fruitful in the future.
Perhaps these issues should be approached with greater attention and a greater esprit de finesse.
Madam President, I want to start by reinforcing the caution that has been expressed by many colleagues here in addressing this five-year plan.
In setting very ambitious long-term goals we must not take our eyes away from the present.
That was a point made very forcibly by the leader of my group, Mr Poettering, in his opening address.
The Union must not take on a whole range of new tasks without the basic foundation for a successful European economy being in place.
That foundation is clearly the single market.
How strongly is the single market established at the moment?
I want to remind Mr Prodi, and his colleagues who are still here, of the findings of the Commission' s own survey among 3000 European businesses.
Nearly 40% of businesses in this survey are still reporting additional costs to render products or services compatible with national specifications.
This is the Commission' s own survey.
These are the classic symptoms of continued obstruction by national governments - bureaucratic red-tape blocking market entry.
The Commission' s programme shows a disturbing complacency about the completion of the internal market.
We have to keep the pressure up in all areas by removing further barriers, intensifying pressure on Member States who fail to implement single market measures and, of course, extending into crucial new areas like financial services.
Only on the strong foundation of the single market will the agenda of enlargement be successfully achieved.
An enlarged Europe must build on the existing strengths of the Union.
The single market extending across that enlarged Union is going to be a colossal achievement.
I conclude by saying, on behalf of all my Conservative colleagues - and we are the second largest national delegation in this Parliament - that we pledge our full support to the Commission and to Mr Prodi in achieving this historic task.
Madam President, Mr Prodi, ladies and gentlemen, at the time of our vote on your appointment we invited you to come here today.
The serious business is therefore now going to start as we are to vote on your programme.
From your speech I will concentrate on what you have called the new governance, which you will use as a tool for reconciliation with our fellow citizens.
Yet this new governance simply means how the institutions and our public authorities operate, if we agree that the European Union must be a public authority.
The interlinking of the EU institutions, the responsibilities of the Member States and the local and regional authorities is all very well.
Yet is this really how we will reconcile the people and European construction?
Is this really how we will answer the fundamental questions which are not so much about 'who does what' but more 'what are we doing together' ?
It is these questions which cause concern among our fellow citizens.
In your speech you mentioned the challenges of globalisation and enlargement which await us. I would add to these the future of our social model.
This is why I and my group are so firmly insisting on the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The reason our timetable includes the drafting of this Charter is because we are at a key point in our history. Our Union needs to redefine the values on which it is based, both within its current borders and also with a view to the imminent enlargements which we earnestly desire, but not under just any conditions.
Our people expect more Europe, but not just any Europe.
They are expecting us not to fall in with globalisation but rather, on the basis of our social model, to be able to organise globalisation.
In this respect I must say that, in terms of your commitment to a political union, to which we are favourable, this cannot be achieved unless it is based on our social model, on our originality and our capacity to better regulate the business of this world.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, I should like to start with a quote: "The Commission will continue to work towards establishing a European Charter of Fundamental Rights and draw up proposals to bring about an ambitious programme.
The Commission is planning in particular to develop a genuine European policy on asylum and immigration. It wishes to boost judicial assistance and cooperation and to develop an effective approach to the fight against all forms of crime" .
That is the entire programme for the next five years on the question of internal security, freedom, citizens' rights and judicial cooperation.
A paper this short is a farce.
A farce because we know and appreciate the work of Commissioner Vitorino and what we have here on paper is a blatant contradiction to how things actually stand.
A paper such as this is no basis for a scoreboard.
It has been extolled and celebrated as a huge achievement and I am all for it; we need a basis for a scoreboard.
We here in Parliament want to hold a serious discussion about the future development in this policy area on the basis of a programme.
What we are looking for are minimum standards in asylum procedures so that refugees can be given help quickly, and those who are not fleeing know where they stand.
We want instruments to prevent abuse.
We want to develop a Community immigration policy which takes account of the Member States' capacity to absorb immigrants and we need to extend the operational powers of EUROPOL, for example, so that specific steps can be taken to combat organised crime.
We debate these issues intensively and seriously and we should be entitled to expect likewise from the Commission, even where it is merely submitting a paper.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, I rise to speak on the subject of the World Trade Organisation, on which there is a broad convergence of views between the Commission documents and the positions of the Socialist Group. This is not the case in other areas, as has already been pointed out.
We share these views because we are in favour of world trade, but we want this trade to be conducted according to common standards, common rules which would regulate world trade with one aim in mind. This aim is that trade should benefit development, and particularly harmonious development in which the values of citizenship do not only apply to the world' s most dynamic and competitive regions.
On the other hand, what does this statement tell us about principles?
This regulation and these standards have brought an increased volume of trade for the World Trade Organisation, in other words, increased wealth, but when we look at how this wealth is distributed, we see, unfortunately, that the gulf between the world' s richest countries and blocks and the poorest and least developed countries continues to increase.
It is therefore quite legitimate and even imperative that we ask ourselves, what purpose do the current common standards and rules serve?
What good are the current way in which we negotiate and the way in which the World Trade Organisation works, if they cause trade to increase on the one hand, but on the other, they create problems and above all cause this gulf between rich and poor countries to grow?
That is why we said that we were in favour of the strategy that the Commission outlined here for the Seattle negotiations and for later ones.
We are certainly in favour of this strategic vision but we need to be brave and ambitious.
We need to be demanding and ensure that social rights, environmental rights and consumer protection are incorporated into the forthcoming negotiations.
Most importantly though, we must have a brave and ambitious long-term vision for reform, not just of the WTO but also of the ILO, the United Nations and above all, of the financial institutions, specifically the IMF and the World Bank.
We must be brave and not only see some aspects of globalisation. We must be brave enough to have more of an overview of this process, so that wealth does not only benefit the most highly-developed blocks and countries, but that there is also harmonious change and development in every region in the world.
Madam President, I would also like to welcome the Commission' s initiative of presenting us with a report on its strategic objectives for the next five years, although I hope that it intends, in subsequent documents, to avoid the excess of generalisations and the vagueness of the text which we are examining today.
Having said this, Madam President, I am prepared, once again, to be a voice crying in the wilderness as a result of the absence of a fishing policy.
It is really surprising that the Commission does not treat the revision of one of its common policies as a strategic objective for the coming years, in view of the reform which must take place in 2002.
There is no doubt whatsoever that this revision process will be the most important thing to affect the fishing industry for many years.
However, it seems that the Commission does not share this view, although it is the Commission which is obliged to present the Council and Parliament with a report on the functioning of the common fisheries policy over the last decade before the end of 2001, and it is on this basis that the Council will have to make the appropriate decisions with regard to its modification.
In fact, the revision process has already begun for many bodies and institutions, such as the European Parliament, which in 1998 already issued and adopted a report pointing out all the current problems and deficiencies of the common fisheries policy.
We have often asked for a basic timetable for this revision and we have received no reply.
Less than two years is not much time if we bear in mind also that the fishing policy is anomalous with regard to the internal market regulations and that such anomalies should be resolved within the framework of this reform process.
Therefore, Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, I would ask that this issue, which is of vital importance to a very significant industry within the European Union, be taken into account in this strategy and these strategic objectives for the next five years.
Madam President, I should like to add my congratulations to Commissioner Prodi's programme.
I particularly welcome his recognition of this virtuous circle of having sustained growth: the information society in an expanding European market with the addition of a fully functioning single currency which will give us the opportunity to genuinely promote prosperity, innovation enterprise, the entrepreneurial spirit and yes - most importantly of all - extra-high value sustainable jobs for our European citizens.
I have one observation, not a criticism, to make regarding Commissioner Prodi's statement this morning and that is that it was a little weak on the actual content of economic policy.
We must not take anything for granted in terms of how we get the European economy restructured.
After all, what is social justice if it is without full employment?
Full employment is the best way to generate social justice for our citizens.
This is a key priority for us to focus on.
I should like to welcome one or two initiatives that have already come from the Commission which will help us: in particular Commissioner Liikanen's commitment to having an innovative knowledge-driven economy.
Yes, e-Europe will be the future for us because it will help us create new prosperity and new jobs.
I welcome the Commission initiatives now and in the past to support our small and medium-sized enterprises and I would like to congratulate our Portuguese Presidency for its initiative on having a charter for micro-businesses.
That is important and something that can be developed through the Lisbon Summit.
I also welcome Commissioner Busquin's idea to have a common research area for the whole of the European Union.
Again, this is a way that we can help create better opportunities for jobs and for prosperity.
You said in your summary, Commissioner Prodi, that liberalisation, competitiveness, keeping inflation low, innovation, science and technology are central for the future success of the European economy and creating jobs.
I very much agree with you on that, but we can take nothing for granted.
There is still more we have to do, and the Lisbon Summit will become part of that.
So with those remarks I would like to congratulate you on the programme and wish it every success.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, I should like to focus on two points which are not mentioned in your programme.
To me, this Commission strategy paper for the next five years reads like a scientific paper on the European Union or a declaration of principle.
Unfortunately, it does not give the impression of being a real political strategy on the part of the Commission.
As the spokesperson for cultural and training policy for my group, I would have expected more in the way of agenda from an Italian President of the Commission.
The Commission gives no soul to Europe.
Culture and training simply do not exist in this paper, despite the fact that we need to create a real area of training and culture in Europe.
Just a few main points.
I am talking about the integration of the policies of the culture industry in this area of training and culture; they create jobs.
I am talking about the introduction of cultural mainstreaming in all policy areas, about consolidating and improving the European dimension of training and education syllabuses and about networking training and education policies in Europe especially lifelong learning.
Mr President of the Commission, it is the new millennium and you made no mention whatsoever of the audio-visual area of Europe.
Nor was any mention made of information policy and communications catering to the needs of our citizens.
It seems to me that something is missing from this programme.
Truly European citizenship depends on our creating a real, visible area of training and culture.
Declarations of principle are not enough.
We need an agenda which can be translated into political action by the Commission on an ongoing basis in the way in which I have just described.
Madam President, Mr Prodi, how would you take stock of your policy and work programme, what would your benchmark be, if you had to make direct choices?
You have the fine, charming idea that the outcome and the benchmark for your policy and for your five-year programme will be the result of the elections, or rather the turnout at the next European elections.
When I think that I have to explain your work programme week in, week out to my constituents, not in the rarefied atmosphere of this House, but on the street, then I ask myself, what can I say?
Mr Prodi, what can I say; what is there that is new?
There is nothing new in your work programme.
You have taken 12 pages for five years and 18 pages for one year' s work programme.
Does that give me hope for the year 2000?
No, it does not!
In your work programme for 2000 you state something quite clever.
You say that environmental considerations must be integrated into all other policy areas.
Have you done so, Mr Prodi; have you even read your work programme for the year?
No, you have not done so.
You have not integrated environmental policy into enlargement, despite the fact that it will be one of the fundamental problems of enlargement.
Nor have you integrated it into economic policy, competition or the internal market.
You have not integrated it anywhere.
You have tacked a few components together but you have no overall structure.
You said earlier in your speech that a disaster such as that of the Danube is an example of the need for an emergency structure; no, Mr Prodi, we need, at long last, to start transposing legislation and ensuring that legislation is monitored.
You say in your five-year programme that the people of the European Union rightly expect food standards to be higher and better foodstuffs legislation.
Mr Prodi, you do not know what you are talking about.
The foodstuffs legislation in the European Union is the most ambitious in the world.
Where it falls short, what is missing, is transposition in the Member States and monitoring.
It is time you took your job seriously, it is time for you, as President of the Commission, to box the Member States on the ears and force them to do their work and fulfil their duties.
It is no good spending time on hobbies when there is a day' s work to be done.
