.
(ES) Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, as chairman of this Parliament' s Committee on Fisheries, Mr Prodi, you are not making things easy for me at all.
I feel duty bound to publicly denounce the fact that fishing is absent from the programme which you have presented to us.
The next five years of the Prodi Commission - as you solemnly announce in the first of your conclusions - will mean great change.
I hope that this change will not mean an even greater marginalisation of fishing, since the silence of your programme, with regard to fishing, is deafening.
Not a single line, nor a single word, refers to fishing or the CFP.
I am not asking for details or specific points, but I believe that a mention was required.
How could you completely ignore a common - I repeat; common - policy with such an economic, social and regional impact, and which therefore affects the economic and social cohesion of Europe?
This is all the more serious, if that is possible - as others have said - bearing in mind that your Commission, Mr Prodi, has to carry out nothing less than a revision or reform of the current common fisheries policy, which you are legally required to do in 2002.
Does the Commission intend to do nothing - at least it has announced nothing - about this reform in 2000 either?
What message can we send to the fishermen of Europe, and their families, and the fishing industries, both the extractive and processing and marketing industries, and the related and secondary industries which depend on fishing in so many European ports, in so many European regions, in most cases peripheral regions, who rightly demand that this problem be dealt with as a priority?
You have made an explicit reference to the CAP for the coming years, but you have not done so for the CFP, with regard to the double adaptation of the internal market which is necessary to prevent exceptions - as has already been said - and in a global context, in the context of globalisation.
This House has expressed its opinion on the first issue and it will also do so on the second.
I would therefore ask you, Mr Prodi, to make an explicit reference to this problem in your reply today.
Our parliamentary Group will table an amendment in this respect and we expect a positive message from you.
Mr President of the Commission, this is indeed an historic moment for Parliament, a five-year programme following the crisis of the Commission.
On behalf of the Socialist Group, I would like to focus on the point of internal reform.
We wholeheartedly support the programme as it is now laid down in a consultative document and which is also included in the programme of Vice-President, Mr Kinnock, on behalf of the Commission.
We consider it to be of utmost importance that, in terms of financial control, personnel management and bureaucratic short-cuts, we can expect swift lines of policy and a more effective bureaucracy, for the benefit of the citizen.
At the same time, we are aware that this is a massive programme and that, during the overhaul in the next couple of years, it will be necessary to keep the actual results coming in, as before.
Much like in the Netherlands, where, at a given point, women woke up to the fact that, by referring to European legislation, they could improve their status in terms of social security, this is now also the case for scores of other citizens.
They want to see results.
Democracy, transparency and clarity always lead to results, citizens value results and this is what the Commission is judged on.
This is exactly the point which Mr Swoboda and also other Members made: fear of modernisation, globalisation, and the individual losing his own sense of safety and security.
This can be prevented if a European social model is drawn up and if results are achieved in all these concrete areas.
I would therefore strongly advocate internal reform which delivers fast and concrete results at a social level. This gives the citizen a sense of recognition, here in Europe and elsewhere.
Because this citizen - one in five globally - still has no access to elementary social provisions, such as education and health care.
These are really the people who deserve our solidarity.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, I have read and re-read the Commission' s document setting out the strategic objectives for its term in office.
I am delighted that it is being discussed in Parliament, but I also note the compromises and the omissions in it.
The Commission makes only a passing reference to economic and social cohesion, to solidarity between Member States and to the European Union' s regional policy.
And this is true even when it addresses the issue of enlargement.
Are reducing the disparities between levels of development and the consequent promotion of real convergence objectives that we have already achieved?
Certainly not!
At the same time, it was rightly pointed out that Europe must evaluate its role as a joint partner with developing countries, and strengthen its activities designed for fighting poverty.
This document leaves out issues which clearly should have been included.
I think the fact that the Commission does not address the issue of cohesion is extremely serious.
It plays down one of the Treaties' principles - that of economic and social cohesion - which must inform all of the European institutions' policies and measures. It seems to ignore the fact that various European regions are still considerably less advanced than others.
It also forgets that enlargement means that we must get regional policy right. Unless we achieve real convergence, the cohesion of the European Union itself will be at risk.
We should take into consideration the sixth periodic report on the situation of the regions in the European Union, for which the Commission is responsible.
This report confirms that whereas an average level of development is given a rating of 100, the ten so-called "strongest" regions reached an average of 158, and the ten so-called "weakest" regions reached a figure of around 50.
You may draw your own conclusions.
50 is exactly the level of development of my own region, the Azores, one of the regions defined in the Treaties as ultra-peripheral.
I am waiting for the Commission' s report on the ultra-peripheral regions, which the Council decided should be drawn up by December 1999.
I shall finish by restating my conviction that without economic and social cohesion, there will be no cohesion at all, only disunity.
Madam President, Mr Prodi, Europe needs a strong Commission.
As intended by the Treaties and the will of the people, the Commission is the driving force of European construction which is like a rock of Sisyphus which we have to push back up to the summit again together after each round of enlargement. We therefore need a strong Commission but one which relies on the support of a parliament.
This House is therefore your ally but not one which is too accommodating. You must therefore listen to our opinions, one or two of which I wish to express in my brief speech.
Firstly, Mr President, although your two predecessors concentrated on developing an internal market and establishing the single currency, it has been left to you to develop this whole value of citizenship which is at the heart of European construction.
You must not allow yourself to be distracted by the sole issue of enlargement, however important this may be.
You must go further, towards reconciling the people with Europe, in particular those people who are falling victim to economic, social and, probably, in the future, technological divisions.
The promotion of scientific development and new technologies and access for all to these technologies will not be provided by the market or competition. The latter will also not ensure the social proximity and effectiveness of the main community services of health, education, transport, communications, water and whatever else.
Your action programme and your objectives are reserved, even silent, specifically on the stimulation of public investment which is needed.
This is also the case with the consolidation and financing of the main public and general interest services.
This is an absolute priority if you are to reconcile Europe with the people and ensure that the people choose Europe rather than Jörg Haider.
Madam President, the Commission was correct to make food safety one of its top priorities.
The recent dioxin scare in Belgium, prior to that the BSE crisis in Britain, and the continuing controversy over the safety of genetically-modified foods, have all contributed to undermining consumer confidence in the safety of the food they eat.
If the Commission can indeed restore confidence in the food production chain it will simultaneously restore confidence in the European Union institutions themselves and demonstrate their ability to protect the rights of EU citizens.
I therefore welcome the fact that the issue of food safety, public health and consumer confidence features prominently in the Commission's work programme for 2000.
However, I was disappointed with the nature of the proposal for the establishment of a European food authority in the recent White Paper.
In its present form, what is being proposed is more like an advisory agency to the Commission rather than an independent body that would have decision- and law-making powers more similar to those of the US Food and Drug Administration, which has already established credibility in this particular field.
Furthermore, future legislation must address the modus operandi of the relationship between the European food authority and the authorities of national Member States, for example the food safety authority in Ireland.
This body, for example, alongside the recently established cross-border body in Ireland for food safety, is already doing good work.
It would be a tragedy if their efforts were to be undermined by deficiencies in EU legislation.
My fear is that such deficiencies in EU legislation could lead to turf wars between national and EU bodies, who should be working together rather than against one another.
That is something we must guard against.
Madam President, the presentation by President Prodi today has necessarily been a fairly broad brush affair.
We will be looking for the detail year by year, for example in the social action programme to be unveiled this year.
We will also be looking at this from the perspective of social and employment policy, and will be applying a number of tests.
We will be looking at the extent to which we can create an equilateral policy triangle combining economic policy, employment policy and social policy.
At the moment, social policy is trailing well behind economic and employment policy.
Within the employment strategy we will look for a deepening and broadening of the strategy following the review under the Portuguese presidency and within the framework being proposed by the Portuguese Presidency.
Within the social dimension we will be looking for a deepening of the internal market with a social aspect.
The spate of mergers, takeovers and transfers that we are experiencing with the deepening of the market means that we must act to update the matrix of information and consultation directives that we have adopted in the past; but we must also complement them with the new general framework of information and consultation and an updating of the works council directive.
We also need a code of corporate conduct to make sure that companies in fact work in partnership with their workers in the management of change.
That is the successful way to manage change, and I hope the Commission will act to make sure that is put into place.
Finally, with the emergence, the resurgence, of the xenophobic Right within the European Union I hope that our institutions together will do their utmost to give reality to Article 6 by using Article 13 to combat discrimination, and Article 137 to combat exclusion.
We need to move that agenda forward with great urgency now.
The aspirations are fine, President Prodi, we want those aspirations to be matched by action.
Madam President, I hope that it is a good omen that there are still a few i's left for me to dot.
Mr Prodi, you set great store in your reform efforts on introducing a forward-looking employment policy throughout Europe.
However, for the economic sector which I represent, i.e. fisheries, this means change.
We need to break away from planned economy subsidies in favour of a liberal policy which fosters personal responsibility.
We must reduce protective tariffs in order to safeguard effective capacity utilisation in undertakings in the processing industry.
What it comes down to is the competitiveness of the European economy on the world market and the existence of thousands of jobs in the processing industry and offshore fishing.
However, I am sure that I do not need to remind you of the importance of a branch of the economy which is both an economic and a social factor, which affects not only Germany but all the coastal regions of Europe.
Plus, this branch of the economy is one of the few sectors in which Europe has fully integrated powers to decide and act, which is why we expect to be given a right of codecision here too.
This has since been unanimously approved.
The fisheries policy is due for review in a few months' time, i.e. at the beginning of the year 2000.
So it is somewhat upsetting that there is not so much as a mention of this branch of the economy is this paper.
I hope that this is a misunderstanding.
Please, Mr Prodi, stand by your word and implement your promises.
Madam President, many of the speakers from the Socialist Group have already identified key areas where there are gaps in the Commission' s statement.
However, we have acknowledged that this is an innovative and very welcome initiative by the Commission.
One area that I want to focus on, in addition to those already identified, is that of cultural diversity in Europe.
The introduction to this statement acknowledges under the quality of life section that it is important.
But there is nothing in the statement which indicates that the Commission intends to take any steps to deal with the issue of cultural diversity.
If we are to ensure that we defeat the fear-mongers amongst us - those seeking power on the backs of anxious citizens - then we must seriously address the question of how we can live together and how we can dismantle the negative stereotypes that we have of each other, both within the present European Union and among those who seek to join us and, indeed, among those in other parts of Europe and the world who want to come and live and work in Europe.
Unless we address these issues, unless we dismantle these negative stereotypes, unless we take what is best from our various cultures and languages and protect and expand it and ensure that we are serious about having a diverse Europe, we will fail.
Those who are currently coming to the fore in Europe based on fear will win the day.
I am seriously concerned that unless the Commission recognises that this is an important aspect of how we will create a cohesive Europe, we will make progress on the economic front, on the employment front and even on the issue of foreign and security policy, but our citizens will still remain fearful because they will fear the unknown and they will fear those they do not understand.
If we do not take steps to deal with that, we will fail ultimately.
Thank you, Mr De Rossa.
Before giving the floor again to the President of the Commission, I must tell you that I have received, pursuant to Rule 37, seven motions for resolutions to conclude the debate.
Welcome
I would like to inform you that there is a delegation from Kuwait, led by His Excellency, Sheikh Salem Al-Sabah, Vice-Prime Minister and Defence Minister, here in the official gallery.
On behalf of the House, I would like to welcome you to the European Parliament.
Mr President, I should like to raise a point of order in relation to the activities organised today by the Association of Parliamentary Assistants in support of their call for a statute for assistants to be adopted as soon as possible.
I understand that on 26 January the association wrote to the College of Quaestors requesting permission to set up a table outside the Hemicycle today to publicise their initiative.
On the same day, I understand, Mr Balfe gave permission for the assistants to go ahead.
The Parliament services asked to meet with the assistants yesterday to make the necessary physical arrangements.
However, the appointment was cancelled at the last minute.
Parliament has not yet indicated why permission was withdrawn.
Mrs Banotti apparently promised to write a letter explaining why permission was withdrawn but so far no letter has been received.
Can you explain why the approval given to the assistants was withdrawn at the last minute?
Do you agree that the assistants have a legitimate case which must be heard?
Will you do everything in your power to ensure that such last-minute cancellations do not happen again?
Will you do everything in your power to ensure that a statute for assistants is adopted as soon as possible?
Finally, will you make sure that in the meantime Parliament's rules are properly implemented and that assistants are paid, as they should be, on the basis of all the work they do for us?
Without them we would not be able to function.
Mr President, I also rise on a point of order.
Are there any rules or regulations that govern demonstrations within the building of this Parliament, outside the doors of the Hemicycle, to ensure that MEPs are free to come into this Hemicycle to discharge their mandate?
If there are such rules, who has the responsibility for enforcing them and what are they doing to discharge that responsibility?
Mr President, I would like to take up the matter of the statute for assistants, which we have always considered to be a priority, and inform you that - as the Italian delegation of the group - in response to the invitation from the group leader, Mr Barón Crespo, we have forwarded the contracts that we drew up with the assistants to the Quaestors.
I think that we need to make a tangible gesture in order to get a solution to this problem underway.
I would therefore like to call on the Presidency of Parliament to consider that it might be appropriate for the Presidency itself to invite the Members to do likewise.
Mr President, first of all let me say that I am in full support of a statute for assistants.
Yesterday when I arrived in Parliament I was handed a document relating to a proposed demonstration by the assistants outside the doors of Parliament.
As all colleagues will know - and many of you have approached me over the last six months - all exhibitions and such like are filtered first of all through the Comart committee of Parliament.
To give a non-contentious example, no commercial exhibitions can be held here in Parliament for obvious reasons.
Following a letter I received yesterday, I immediately informed the assistants that we would propose that they be allowed to hold a meeting or demonstration, probably in the near future and possibly in the next month.
But all exhibitions must be carried out in a way that do not interfere with the orderly running of Parliament.
I signed a letter yesterday afternoon, in the meeting of the Bureau of Parliament, in which the assistants were informed of this.
But I am also told that they were informed verbally of this decision by the Committee of Chairmen of Groups last Thursday, so they were fully aware of the decision.
There is no problem with them telling us the way they feel, there is no problem with a possible meeting during Parliament's next part-session.
But there was some misunderstanding, for they did receive a letter from somebody else that they felt gave them permission.
But all exhibitions are in fact looked at first by the so-called Comart committee.
As you can see we have many exhibitions around Parliament, whether they be about different countries or whatever.
This is not an attempt to either censor or go against the very real and justifiable principle that we should have a statute for assistants.
Thank you, Mrs Banotti.
I think your intervention may clarify various points that were raised.
Mr President, I wanted to point out an important matter of principle.
I personally believe that it is nothing short of scandalous that we hear Members of this Parliament attacking the demonstration rather than looking at the solution to the problem, which is fair conditions, fair pay and fair hours.
We shall now proceed to the vote.1
VOTE
Mr President, I am speaking on behalf of the Spanish delegation of the European People' s Party, the delegation of the Spanish People' s Party, with regard to Mrs Terrón i Cusí' s resolution on the area of freedom, security and justice.
There have been some votes where we have not followed the guidelines of the Group of the European People' s Party, and we have voted in favour of the Terrón i Cusí resolution, which we consider on the whole to be excellent.
However, we have voted against paragraphs 2 and 6, because they seem to us to be legally incorrect.
On the other hand, we have voted in favour of Recital J which, in fact, is in line with what I, as draftsperson of the opinion of the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms, proposed to that Committee, with a view to the Intergovernmental Conference.
We have also voted in favour of paragraph 13.
