In any case, the precautionary principle requires these products to be clearly traceable at all stages of their marketing.
However, before labelling we need clear rules.
Straight questions must be asked about the real end-use of animal meal, for example.
Although we are looking at all the problems caused by these products in ethical and health terms, it is their use which must be questioned today.
In this respect, the chapter of the White Paper on food safety which deals with feedingstuffs must serve as a working basis for going beyond mere commercial questions.
The Commission has on many occasions used the farm-to-table example which our colleague in the PPE Group has just underlined.
This is a good idea but it must be made to be meaningful and, to do this, the problems linked to animals and those linked to consumer health must be dealt with at the same time.
This is why it is essential to approve Amendment No 2 to Recital 4 which avoids the risks of the monopoly which would arise if companies which were the first to be authorised to place an additive on the market were to remain the only ones able to continue marketing it during the re-evaluation procedure.
Also, Amendments Nos 4 and 5 to the new Article 2a must be approved as these will ensure that genetically modified additives are clearly identified as such, thus allowing users to make fully informed decisions.
Mr President, because of the availability of high-technology additives in the feedingstuffs industry, detailed information on their use is needed from the actors, and as we know there are a lot of them, so that we can put a stop to practices which infringe Community law.
This directive on additives in feedingstuffs cannot achieve this on its own.
Other directives will follow and I believe that the Committee on Agriculture is well placed to deal with them.
Up the point at which meat, milk, bread and other products are sold over the shop counter, feedingstuffs and additives are structured, mixed, blended, cut and transported several times.
The fight by feedingstuff manufacturers to gain maximum market shares causes a lot of problems, just as it does in the foodstuffs industry.
The negative consequences are well known, the positive ones less so.
I am firmly convinced that the most sensible way of protecting the health of European citizens in the ecological chain is through the production of feedingstuffs in the region for the region.
However, more work is needed on this.
Mr President, may I commence by congratulating the rapporteur, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, on his report.
It reflects the views and concerns of all EU citizens in the area of food safety and quality.
The events of the past couple of years have certainly created an awareness and concern about the real threat to food safety and public health.
The swift action taken by this Parliament must be seen by all citizens as their greatest guarantee for the future, for you have set an agenda on food quality to which Member States must conform.
But even in this crucial area of administration, Parliament reflects its commitment to subsidiarity by encouraging Member States to take on and to face up to their responsibility.
In Agenda 2000, we have in my view prioritised policies that are of direct concern to citizens: food safety, water quality, environmental protection and rural development.
If we pursue this agenda with commitment and diligence, the early years of the new millennium will be a milestone in the implementation of policies that are people-focused and very much reflect community needs.
I welcome in particular the proposed new and strict authorisation procedures for additives in animal feeds.
Those found in breach of them must be dealt with severely.
I compliment the new Commissioner responsible for food safety, Mr Byrne.
He has an onerous undertaking but he has responded quickly and effectively to the requirements of this House, as well as to the concern of consumers.
I am particularly pleased that my own country, Ireland, is to the forefront in the implementation of new food regulations based on the principle of traceability.
This will make the island of Ireland the centre of excellence in the future for food production.
Mr President, Commissioner, I too congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work. I am particularly pleased about the unanimity shown on this issue within the group.
It is therefore specified that, through the adoption of a regulation, the Commission will replace the existing authorisations with authorisations linked to the person responsible for putting the additives into circulation. This will occur at the same time for all the additives in question.
A coherent legal framework must be re-established.
As of October 1999 the Commission proposed introducing a legal basis into Directive 70/524/EEC for the replacement of the authorisations.
However, we must ensure that competition distortions are not created, as highlighted by Mr Kindermann and Mrs Auroi.
Genetically modified additives must also be clearly identified in feedingstuffs in order to allow the end-consumer to choose food without GMO components or based on GMO components and to guarantee this.
The consumer must remain free to make a fully informed decision.
This proposal has no financial consequences for the Community budget.
There must therefore be total transparency for producers and consumers in the area of food safety.
I am sure that the Commission can accept the report which, as you know, was approved unanimously in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
Mr President, we have said in this House time and again since the BSE crisis that feedingstuffs are one of the first and most important factors in safe food production and in consumer health and protection.
We therefore welcome the Commission' s proposal on additives in feedingstuffs.
The Committee on behalf of which I am speaking, namely the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection, decided in December, on the assumption that the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture would draft such a good report, that we could waive our opinion.
Nevertheless, I should like to say a few words on the report and express a view on a number of points.
First, perhaps, I should say something on the question of the legal base.
Even if we have new Rules of Procedure in Parliament, and it may well be that, with such an ambitious chairman in the Committee on Agriculture, problems of legislative competence will arise more and more frequently between the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on the Environment, one thing is always crystal clear for me in this sort of conflict: cohesion in this Parliament is crucial and the legal basis of a question is crucial as far as I am concerned.
Therefore, and I must address this comment to you Mr Byrne, I reject your choice of legal basis.
If it is merely a hand-me-down legal basis taken over from previous directives, then it is a mistake to keep it.
The Treaty of Amsterdam states quite clearly that, where people' s health is concerned, Article 152 is the correct legal base, and may I say to our own Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market that it is simply not good enough to look at the Commission' s proposal and say, there is nothing in it about health and consumer protection, so it has nothing to do with health and consumer protection.
My group, as Mr Kindermann has already said, will therefore vote tomorrow to change the legal base and I hope that other groups in this House will do likewise.
Mr Byrne, I ask you to accept and agree to the change of legal basis for the sake of transparency and good cooperation.
If we do not change it and we follow the Legal Affairs Committee, we shall be opening the floodgates to manipulation.
The Commission would be able to determine the choice of legal basis by excluding any reference to health policy and we would suddenly find ourselves up against an Article 37.
Allow me to comment briefly on two other points. First, genetically modified micro-organisms in feedingstuffs.
We cannot just refer to vertical legislation and say that at some point we will need another law.
We do not have another law at the moment, and until we do, we must deal with genetically-modified micro-organisms as and when we pass legislation; we must include them as an add-on and insist that they be labelled.
The rapporteur has done just that and that is a good sign.
I say now, as I have said on numerous occasions in the past: yes, I too would like the Commission to propose a positive list which we can then debate and deal with in this House, but we do at least need a starting point for a positive list of additives in feedingstuffs.
It is equally important to have strict hygiene requirements for the manufacture of additives and for proper controls to be carried out in the Member States.
There are serious shortcomings in both areas and we have a great deal of work to do yet.
Mr President, I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report.
This is an issue that we will no doubt be reconsidering on a number of occasions in the future.
What has happened in recent years has brought to our attention the tremendous problems facing not only to the producers of food but also the consumers.
We must strike a balance between them.
We must resolve this issue, because it is important that consumers should regain confidence in the food they eat.
One way to achieve this is to have total transparency as far as food labelling is concerned.
GMOs are the new challenge facing us.
This is something that people are very worried about and quite rightly so: I myself share these concerns.
But I think we should not allow our concerns about GMOs to overshadow our concerns about growth promoters used in animal feed or antibiotics used in compound feed.
Indeed, we should not allow GMOs to obscure the fact that meat and bonemeal are still included in animal feeds in many countries in Europe.
One factor behind these developments that has been referred to in this debate is competition - competition between Member States on the cost of the production of food.
These are all areas in which we have to ensure a level playing field: food must be of the same standard in all Member States.
We have had the dioxin scare, BSE and many other problems.
The main problem is a financial one, namely who bears the cost?
The problem is that the cost is not shared equally between the consumer and the producer: the producer has been forced to bear all the cost.
We need an equitable distribution of the extra cost that has been incurred.
We must also ensure that the food that is imported into the European Union meets the standards within the European Union.
If we do not maintain those standards for imported food then we are going to encounter greater difficulties in the future.
. I should first like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and its rapporteur, the committee chairman, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, for examining the Commission's proposal.
The Commission proposal is, as some of you have said, rather technical.
Nonetheless it has a relatively simple objective: to harmonise procedures governing the authorisation of feed additives.
At present there is a difference in treatment between authorisations, depending on whether applications were submitted before or after 1 January 1988.
The purpose of the Commission's proposal is to harmonise procedures to ensure that no such difference exists.
The scope of the proposed amendment is therefore very limited.
Five amendments have been presented by Parliament.
I regret that the Commission is not in a position to accept these amendments, despite the fact that I am fully aware of the views and commitment of Parliament, the Agricultural Committee and, in particular, the rapporteur, Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, on these issues.
I shall deal with each of the individual amendments separately.
The first amendment proposes to change the legal base of the proposal by replacing Article 37 with Article 152.
I would simply point out that the Commission proposal makes no reference to health or consumer protection.
The proposed amendment is technical and cannot be interpreted as having as its primary objective the protection of public health.
I note that Parliament's Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market also accepts that Article 37 is the appropriate legal base.
I remind Parliament that in Article 152 the primary objective is the protection of health.
I commend to you the arguments set out in the letter from the Legal Affairs Committee which sets out the position, in my view, with precision, clarity and commendable brevity.
Amendments Nos 2 and 3 go much further than the Commission proposal since they aim to introduce additional provisions on genetically modified additives.
I am the first to accept that GMOs are a very important issue.
I also accept and acknowledge that a number of initiatives to update EU legislation in the field of GMOs are necessary.
However, this technical amendment is not the correct instrument to introduce such initiatives.
The Commission is of the view that it is premature to amend the rules currently laid down by Directive 70/524 on genetically modified additives at this stage.
Instead it is appropriate to await developments in relation to the common position on the amendment to Directive 90/220, which is currently in second reading in Parliament.
The Commission envisages going much further than is currently proposed by Parliament in its amendments.
I can also assure Parliament that I will ensure that the pertinent provisions of Directive 90/220 are included in the proposal for a recasting of Directive 70/524 that the Commission has proposed in the White Paper on food safety to present to Parliament before July 2001.
I can also assure Parliament that all observations made here today will be fully taken into account.
Amendments Nos 4 and 5 are also unacceptable because they give undue preference to copy products by granting them authorisation to be placed into circulation even before an application for authorisation has been submitted.
The Commission insists on first evaluating such applications as to their safety and efficacy before giving authorisations.
I can only ask you again to bear in mind the technical nature of the Commission proposal and to wait for the substantive proposal for a new directive on additives in feedingstuffs to address wider issues.
I should just like to deal with some of the specific issues that were raised during the debate.
First of all, regarding the observations made by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, I wish to assure him that we will change the procedure for authorisation of GMO additives in the Additives Directive 70/524, and not in the Novel Feed Directive.
This is a directive that deals more specifically with raw materials rather than with additives.
The text taken by Parliament is from the Directive which was adopted in 1998.
But the vertical legislation in Directive 90/220 on how to carry out the environmental risk assessment of GMOs has changed since then and is still changing.
It is before Parliament for second reading.
It is my belief that we should await the final outcome of Directive 90/220 and in particular, Article 11.
Reference was also made to the question of whether this proposal could give rise to the risk of the establishment of monopolies.
Mr Kindermann and Mrs Auroi made reference to this.
There are just a few points I should like to make on that issue.
First of all, this matter has been in the pipeline since 1993, so it has not really been sprung on any other commodity producers.
Indeed any such applicants can still apply in respect of their particular product.
I should also stress that the Commission has never approved any application for an authorisation for GMOs to be included in additives.
Mrs Roth-Behrendt made reference to the question of the appropriate legal base, whether it should be Article 37 or Article 152.
I again refer to what I said earlier in relation to this and assure her and the House that it would be entirely inappropriate for the Commission to seek to justify any measure based on Article 37 merely by excluding from the provision any reference to public health.
This is an issue that has been looked at on at least two separate occasions by the European Court of Justice, which has laid down the legal criteria for situations such as this where the appropriate legal base has to be properly taken into account when putting forward legislation.
The jurisprudence of the Court appears to be quite clear in relation to this.
As an overall comment to the suggested amendments here, particularly in relation to the legal base issue, it would be inappropriate, in my opinion, to change the legal base to Article 152 in these circumstances, as it would be very likely to fall foul of the objective criteria that have been laid down by the Court.
A number of you made reference - Mr Nicholson in particular - to the issue surrounding labelling.
Directive 70/524 foresees the issue of labelling in the genetic modification of additives.
It is already included now: "indication of the particular characteristics due to the manufacturing products".
So this issue will be addressed.
That formula enabled us to oblige applicants to put on the label the fact that genetic modification techniques have been used in the product, the subject matter of the application.
Mr President, allow me to ask the Commissioner one more question.
First allow me to point out, Commissioner Byrne, that the European Parliament has no right of legislative initiative.
But we do reserve the right, when you propose to amend a directive or a regulation, to look at the whole regulation and not just the part which you have singled out.
Nonetheless, we have confined ourselves in our proposed amendments to bringing the text into line with that of other directives and we have disregarded the question of content.
For example, you did not go into antibiotics.
We are therefore talking about harmonising the legal provisions in the individual directives.
My question, Commissioner Byrne is this: the UN conference in Montreal decided that genetically-modified organisms must be labelled for international trade.
Do you really believe that, if we could, Parliament would permit labelling to be left off feedingstuff additives within the European Union?
Commissioner Byrne, it appears that you want to engage in a test of strength with Parliament.
We negotiated the seed marketing legislation for two years.
I look forward to the next round.
. I would stress that no GMOs have been approved under this directive; it applies only to additives.
I would also say in relation to the questions surrounding labelling that this is a complex issue.
It is being addressed and will be addressed in a comprehensive way, particularly in Directive 90/220.
This issue is before Parliament at the moment and there will be other directives dealing it, which will also come under the legal base of Article 152 which gives Parliament full competence in the areas of codecision.
I would assure Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf that it is by no means my intention or wish to have any clash or test of strength with Parliament on this issue.
It is my intention, as it has always been, to work in cooperation with Parliament, to ensure that the results we achieve are the very best results.
The best way of dealing with this issue is through the draft legislation before Parliament at the moment, as well as the legislation in the pipeline, rather than in this technical document and in circumstances where the questions that are set out and to be debated in Directive 90/220 may not be fully taken into account.
It is best to wait for that debate which, I understand, will take place fairly soon.
All of these matters will be addressed in that legislation.
Thank you, Commissioner.
Parliament has taken due note of your comments.
