The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Scrapie
The next item is the report (A5-0023/2000) by Mr Böge, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 91/68/EC as regards scrapie (COM(1998) 623 - C4-0026/1999 - 1998/0324(COD)).
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, it was and always will be one of life' s mysteries, one of the unsolved riddles of the follow-up to the BSE crisis, that we still have no Community rules for the control of scrapie in sheep.
In this respect, the Commission' s proposals to amend directive 91/68 and delete the reference to scrapie and the report by Mrs Roth-Behrendt on the detection and control of TSE infections in general, comply with Parliament' s demands in the wake of the follow-up report by the BSE committee of inquiry and we expressly welcome this.
I should, however, like to add that no new scientific knowledge was needed which proved that the experimental infection of sheep by feeding them BSE-infected feed produced a clinical expression of the disease which is indistinguishable from the symptoms of scrapie.
No new knowledge was needed, because the theory from the beginning was that BSE and scrapie must be related and this theory has increasingly taken hold.
From this point of view we are slightly behind the times.
I am therefore in complete agreement with the Commission' s proposal on scrapie.
I should, however, like to add that it only makes sense if we ensure that the new TSE regulation allows a reasonable symbiosis between consumer protection and practicable suggestions.
We therefore need to take consistent account of six or seven points in the coming debate on the TSE proposal, and that of course includes scrapie.
When we discuss the TSE regulation, Commissioner, we must also clarify that we shortly intend to discuss separate proposals under Article 152 as the corresponding legal base for products excluded from this regulation, such as cosmetics, medicinal products or animal feed.
We insist on this.
As far as I am concerned, that means that fundamental core provisions in this proposed regulation must not be relegated yet again to the Annex but included in the body of the proposed regulation because we here in Parliament want to and will assume joint responsibility here.
It also means that, when we are fighting these diseases, the problem of destroying whole herds in the event of an outbreak of scrapie or BSE and the question of defining geographical areas are items which also remain on the agenda.
Although I welcome the fact that the fight against scrapie is included in the TSE regulation, I feel that the Commission' s proposals for fighting scrapie are still not consistent enough and I shall submit amendments on behalf of the Committee for Agriculture and Rural Development to tighten up the proposals when the Roth-Behrendt report is debated.
I should also like to address two other points. We expressly welcome the regional classification of the status of Member States as regards outbreaks of scrapie or TSEs.
Here again the Commission is increasing its response to the work carried out by and the demands made by Parliament.
Finally, in discussing the question of the future application of tests, we should of course bear in mind that we have still not reached the point where tests are generally applicable.
But the tests available now are perfectly able to guarantee security in consumer health policy, albeit not for every individual animal.
But when we need to consider if a region can move from a negative epidemiological status to a better category, an epidemiological inspection of the situation in a region in the form of suitable sampling in abattoirs using such tests can provide useful pointers in the political and scientific debate as to where there is a need for preventive consumer protection and, basically, where such tests can be used to help us settle disputes on a proper basis.
I would be grateful, Commissioner, if you would take these passing comments on board in the report on scrapie and in the general report on the fight against TSEs and bear in mind that we shall be calling you to account on these points.
Mr President, over the years, the following situation has arisen: one subject has developed into a subject of many facets.
Many of us here in this House have spent years, whether we intended to or not, dealing solely with the consequences of the BSE scandal right down to the last detail.
And it is still on the agenda today.
It is therefore hardly surprising that I and Mr Böge are talking about it and that Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has just mentioned it in his report.
The cast is always the same.
Although the cause was unfortunate, it was certainly not the worst experience of this Parliament.
My task as draftsman of the opinion of the Environment Committee is a very simple one.
I agree with the rapporteur and am able to say that the Environment Committee has asked the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to agree to the Commission proposal.
That saves a great deal of time which I would like to use for other things and which I shall use now somewhat in anticipation, as Mr Böge has just done.
I have yet to submit my report on TSEs to the House.
At first we were somewhat irresolute and we regret that now.
But I have come to the conclusion that it was in fact quite clever timing.
This debate does in fact give us an excellent opportunity, Mr Byrne, to give the Commission a few things to think about.
Although we did not have a very positive exchange on Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf' s report earlier on and will certainly have to agree to disagree, things may be different with this report.
Allow me to say from the outset that the part of the complex report which Mr Böge dealt with - and this form of collaboration between two committees, with one leading committee and the other giving an opinion and vice versa, worked very well and could perhaps be used as a model for the future - is relatively simple.
It will become more difficult once we see the TSE proposal, Mr Byrne.
When we have the chance to ask direct questions, the questions which Mr Böge referred to will be asked.
Questions will be asked - questions which I shall have to put to you and the Commission representatives in committee - on how things stand with the BSE status of the Member States and other third countries.
How will BSE status in fact be defined then?
Do you envisage circumstances under which the BSE status will depend on the willingness to apply a BSE test?
And then there is my standing question to you Mr Byrne, a question you certainly already know and which will not surprise you. What about the BSE test?
When will you make it compulsory?
Perhaps you will do so before Parliament debates the TSE report.
Not that I want to put it off, but it would be a gesture, as it were, if you could say: here is the proposed legislation on the BSE test.
I know that I am a thorn in your side on this, but sometimes that is my job.
I say quite emphatically, even after the report by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, who is completely involved in the whole idea, that animal feeding, animal rearing, animal production must be suited to the species and must also, above all, cause no harm or danger to human beings.
Cosmetic, medical and other products cannot be excluded on the grounds that they cause no harm or are not dangerous.
That is, without doubt, too short, too sweet and too little.
You are lucky that Mr Böge' s report only deals with this on the sidelines; with my report you will have to justify yourself more thoroughly and you will have more trouble doing so.
Finally, just one more brief comment, Mr Byrne.
We have a new Commission.
Whether or not we will agree with the work carried out by this Commission and the President of the Commission, only time will tell.
But there is one thing we certainly will not let you get away with and I am sure that, as a lawyer and politician you will understand this. Important issues cannot be regulated in annexes.
They belong in the legislative text. I might do the same if I were a Commissioner, because I could simply change an annex under a comitology procedure and I would not always need to work with Parliament, which takes so long and is so difficult.
But you must understand that we cannot let you get away with this.
In other words, whenever I get the chance, I shall take everything out of the annexes and cram it into the legislative text.
And you would be well advised to do likewise from the outset.
Mr President, Commissioner, I should like to remind you of the composition of our food chain and how important it is for this chain to provide us with safe, healthy food which is produced, as a matter of principle, without any questionable or risky interim or end products.
Over recent years, these basic principles have often been neglected in animal husbandry and in epidemiological matters because of shoddy practice or greed.
The European Parliament has already taken a clear stand on BSE and I think that we should do likewise on all epidemics in animals.
We should not allow food safety to be compromised because, in the final analysis, it is our health which is at stake.
The Commission' s proposal encompasses both the transportation and the placing on the market of sheep and goats and a Community regulation to fight scrapie.
This is even more important given that there is no clear proof that BSE and scrapie are unrelated.
Animals are bought throughout Europe and transported over the entire continent.
The spread of an epidemic as the result of bringing in one sick animal can have huge consequences for farmers.
And I should point out that, for the first time in history, a case of scrapie was detected in Austria about four weeks ago.
Scrapie is a particularly insidious disease because the pathogen can remain active in dust for years and is then ingested in food.
The disease is always fatal.
As there is no vaccination, farmers can only protect themselves by not buying animals from countries in which there are cases of scrapie.
Even if scrapie cannot be passed on to human beings, the connection with BSE has still not been clarified, as I have already said.
As a farmer myself, I am most concerned that consumer health should not be put at risk.
I am in favour of preventive measures, starting with feeding which is suitable for the species, rather than measures to combat an epidemic once it has broken out.
I therefore welcome the Commission' s initiative to create a new legal base for combating scrapie.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr Böge' s report on measures to prevent TSE diseases is based on the proposals of the European Parliament' s temporary BSE Committee.
Mr Böge was responsible for some invaluable work on this committee, and it is a relief to see that the job of monitoring the work of the BSE Committee in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has fallen to him: he is the one with the experience.
I would have liked my speech to be part of a discussion that would have also treated the second part of the Commission' s proposal.
I do not think it appropriate to have to conduct in part the same discussion when Mrs Roth-Behrendt' s report from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy is featured in the plenary session.
In the previous speech Mrs Schierhuber said that scrapies is an insidious disease.
It is indeed.
For me as a Finn, and a member who has been active in matters concerning agriculture and the health and transportation of animals, it is most important that those EU states where TSEs do not occur at all will in the future too be guaranteed the right to inspect as fully as is necessary the transportation of live animals.
I wish to stress how important it is for us to remain free of disease.
The possibility, if necessary, of having additional inspections of animals in these areas is not a question of artificial protectionism or the restriction of freedom of movement, as there really is justification for it.
The inspections must be seen as being fair and cost-effective action to promote the wellbeing of animals and prevent increased expenditure for the EU.
On behalf of the European Liberal Democrats, we can support the Commission' s proposal on Mr Böge' s report, but in the forthcoming debate on Mrs Roth-Behrendt' s report we must look again at the position of those countries where TSEs do not occur.
Mr President, I too would like to offer my congratulations to the rapporteur.
There is no doubt that Mr Böge and the rapporteur for the Committee on the Environment are now tremendous experts in this field.
It is very good that they are continuing to monitor this issue on behalf of Parliament because it is extremely important.
Regardless of the many other concerns we may have, BSE has given us a terrible legacy that has to be dealt with and resolved.
It is quite clear that the incidence of scrapie in sheep has been a contributing factor to the overall problem.
I welcome the legal base being set and the comprehensive way the new rules will, I hope, address this situation.
We must ensure that nothing can enter the food chain or the animal compound feed to allow what we have experienced in the past to happen again in the future.
No-one would want to see what happened to farmers with BSE happen ever again.
We have to bring in the most stringent rules and we have to make them work.
It is extremely important both for the producer and the consumer that we restore confidence and the only way we can do it is by rigorously tackling the problem and resolving it.
BSE has certainly not gone away.
You can see it in different countries.
I do not want to point the finger at any particular country, but many countries are now facing similar problems to those we have had in the United Kingdom.
It will be there for some time to come.
We have to ensure that the whole system of traceability, of following the animal from birth until slaughter and right through the whole food chain, is part of that confidence-building mechanism.
If we are not able to achieve that then we will have tremendous trouble in the future.
Finally, I have certainly believed for a long time, coming from an agricultural background myself, that if we had fed the animals the proper food and if the animal feedstuffs had been made up of the proper compounds we would never have had BSE in the first place.
It was never the responsibility of the farmer, it was the food compounders who caused this problem and we have to ensure that it never happens again.
. Mr President, I am pleased to have been given this opportunity to discuss a subject where there is good cooperation between Parliament and the Commission, namely combating TSEs.
I should also like to thank Mr Böge for his work on this issue.
Considerable progress has been made on our proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation under Article 152 of the Treaty on the prevention and control of TSEs.
This proposal addresses all TSE risk in all animals at all stages of the production chain.
I am here today to listen to your opinions on the first step in this process of establishing a truly comprehensive Community system for the control of these diseases.
I have proposed in the proposal at hand to delete all currently existing Community rules on scrapie in sheep and goats and to transpose them to the framework proposal for a regulation.
The detailed rules would then follow in that framework proposal.
I have been informed that you welcome this initiative, as appears from your contributions this afternoon, to formulate a single text.
I am looking forward to discussing any further improvements you might wish to suggest under the framework proposal for the legislation, especially after the reference made by Mrs Roth-Behrendt to her own report and opinion on this issue.
I look forward to receipt of that document, which will be taken into account in all further considerations in relation to this issue.
Finally, I would say this in relation to the observation about including legislation in annexes and the observation that we must achieve an effective balance between Parliament having a full say and yet at the same time our having speedy resolutions, speedy legislation and speedy amendments to existing legislation.
In the months I have been Commissioner and observed the way legislation goes through the system, I can see that much work needs to be done on this issue so that we can all achieve what we seek to achieve, that is, the translation of policy into legislation.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Community policy in the field of water
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A5-0027/2000) on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council directive on establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy (9085/3/1999 - C5-0209/1999 - 1997/0067(COD)) (Rapporteur: Mrs Lienemann).
- (FR) Mr President, Commissioners, ladies and gentlemen, water will be one of the main environmental and world issues of the twenty-first century.
Climate change, global resources, river quality and groundwater aquifer quality are major challenges which threaten our common future.
We will either be able to restore water quality to suit the planet' s ecosystem or we will experience a whole range of adverse events which will threaten the development of certain regions, the living conditions of the inhabitants of other regions and even, more fundamentally, the global balance.
To support this statement, I would point to an excellent report drafted by our colleague, Mário Soares, in the international bodies on the state of the seas and oceans.
When talking about climate change, we have rightly referred to the greenhouse effect and the state of the atmosphere.
Yet we also know that the deterioration of the oceans will significantly destabilise whole areas of our planet.
Europe must therefore lead by example to some extent, both because it must promote a certain development model and because it is itself facing serious problems of pollution and deterioration of its waters, including its groundwater, surface waters and seas.
Furthermore, Europe has signed international conventions, in particular the OSPAR Convention in which it made certain commitments.
In this it said that in a few years' time we must have stopped dumping pollution and halted the increase of pollution and we must have reached a near zero level of toxic and dangerous substances.
Despite having signed these international agreements, this directive and the specific policies in the field reveal that Europe cannot achieve the objectives set or must defer these for so long that the very credibility of its signature of these international conventions is threatened.
This is why in the debate on the framework directive on water policy, the European Parliament has since the first reading demanded coherence between the framework directive and the international objectives, particularly with regard to respect for OSPAR. This convergence must be effective and specific and must commit us to action.
The European Union' s water policy is not starting from zero.
Many directives have already been adopted. Furthermore, the Commission wants to make these directives more understandable and more compatible with each other and to give them clearer objectives.
The preparation of this framework directive is therefore prompted by a desire for rationalisation.
However, at first reading this House insisted that the current directive should not only be compatible with the commitments made, like OSPAR, but should allow us to reverse the course of affairs.
For despite these directives and frequent declarations about the effort which must be made in terms of water protection, when we look at the state of the environment in Europe we can see that the objectives have not been achieved.
In many cases the situation has deteriorated and we therefore cannot settle for just rationalisation of the texts.
We must set objectives which are equal to the challenges facing us.
Yet we do not have much time.
We could, as the Commission has proposed, accept these overlong deadlines which the Commission and the Council have extended even further. Yet if we do, we will not only have a credibility problem with the general public, but these efforts will be postponed until tomorrow and then tomorrow they will be deferred again.
It is clear that in this event the objectives will never be achieved.
I am stressing this point because, when disasters are being reported daily in the news, we cannot just keep on saying for the umpteenth time that Europe did not act when it should have done. Then, in our haste, we act as if we will solve the problems which we refused to tackle properly at the appropriate time.
The current example of the Danube and the pollution from Rumania shows very clearly that if we fail to establish a new method of economic development, clear requirements, controls and precise measures concerning the state of our rivers, this type of incident will not only occur again but will do so increasingly over time.
It is also clear that if we do nothing, our agriculture will continue to develop in a very unbalanced manner.
Even now, the rivers in Brittany are eutrophying and this is damaging tourism.
To conclude, the issues are clear at this second reading.
Do we or do we not want standards compatible with OSPAR, in other words to get dangerous substances down to zero?
Do we want to shorten the deadlines proposed by the Council for this directive?
Do we want to have a pricing policy which enables all public and private participants to clean up and save water?
