If we see in the development of that nuclear power plant that there are concerns about safety we will discuss it with Turkey.
If the conclusion is that Turkey is planning to build a nuclear power plant that does not meet normal European safety standards is concerned then we would do the same as we did with Lithuania, Slovakia and Bulgaria.
Mr President, the Commissioner said that Turkey has signed the non-proliferation treaty, it has signed the nuclear safety treaties: why should there be any doubt at all but that Turkey's nuclear plant should not be just as safe as any in the Community, and would the Commissioner be prepared to take a rather more robust position with Mr Souladakis on this matter?
I think it is the right of a Member of Parliament to raise his own concerns and fears.
I do not have these concerns.
I believe that Turkey completely recognises the standards and the criteria of the convention on nuclear safety and the non-proliferation treaty, but there is no doubt that there are concerns in the public in Europe and I think it is quite right to discuss them here in Parliament.
Question No 29 by (H-0786/99):
Subject: Depleted uranium weapons Has the Commission conducted any studies of the potential effects upon EU states of transboundary pollution arising from the use of depleted uranium weapons in the Kosovan conflict?
If not, why not?
Mrs Wallström has the floor on behalf of the Commission.
Thank you, Mr Bowe, for your question.
The European Commission has monitored the environmental effects of the conflict from the beginning of the NATO action.
As early as last June the Commission financed a first study. It was carried out by the regional environment centre for central and eastern Europe and concluded that there had been no large-scale ecological catastrophe.
None of the subsequent evidence or analysis has overturned that original assessment.
The Commission has also been closely associated with the production of the recent report published by the United Nations environment programme - Balkan Task Force.
This is the most detailed and comprehensive report to date on the environmental effects of the Kosovo conflict and I recommend it to those who have not yet studied it.
The use of depleted uranium weapons was one of the many issues considered and this report is now widely available also on the Net.
The Balkan Task Force was hampered by the fact that little or no information was available on the actual use of these weapons during the conflict.
No indications of contamination were found in Kosovo during the BTF fact-finding mission.
However, this does not exclude the possibility that areas in Kosovo are contaminated by depleted uranium.
From a desk assessment coupled with a fact-finding mission the report concludes that the risks, if any, are limited to an area around the target.
Future actions will take place within the stability pact for south-eastern Europe. A special regional environmental reconstruction plan is also being developed.
It will form the framework for emergency assistance for combating war damage if such action should be needed.
First of all, Mr President, can I thank the Commissioner for that very useful response.
Clearly the Commission has given some consideration to this problem and I am pleased that these reports which have been produced so far have looked carefully at the issue.
But I would like to point out that the concern with depleted uranium weapons is about the way in which they are used.
This uranium becomes air-borne, is inhaled and could now be effectively carried by members of the population in Kosovo with rather more long-term effects than it has been possible to establish so far.
This seems to be the pattern of events that has emerged after the use of depleted uranium weapons in the Gulf war.
I would therefore ask the Commission if it would wish to consider continuation of monitoring and for what length of time they might consider monitoring in future to see the long-term effects, not just of depleted uranium weapons but of some of the other effects on the environment that we do know have occurred at least in a localised way within Kosovo?
How long will you continue to monitor the effects of these weapons?
Thank you, Mr Bowe, for that question.
We have to state again that there is still no confirmation that depleted uranium was used in the conflict and no depleted uranium has been detected in the clean-up of Kosovo.
But those symptoms and those problems that you mentioned could be there and that could be the effect of the use of depleted uranium.
That is also mentioned in the report.
No transboundary effects have been detected and most of the weapons will have been used on the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
The problem is that the current political isolation of the country means that access to this area is restricted.
A big responsibility rests with the United Nations because they are addressed with this report, so they have to take responsibility.
But through this regional and environmental reconstruction plan we can continue the monitoring and the assistance we can give and that is, for the time being, the kind of frame we can use for the work of the European Union.
It is important to follow up and it gives the Member States, as well as the United Nations and the Commission, something to think about when it is a matter concerning military secrets and their effects on the environment.
It also has a long-term effect on thinking when it comes to the use of these sorts of weapons.
Mr President, Commissioner, in a few months' time, hundreds of thousands of holidaymakers will again head for the Adriatic Coast to spend their summer holiday.
We know from media reports that bombs and weapons were dumped just off the coast.
Are you able to confirm that holidaymakers will be able to swim safely in the Adriatic this summer, and are there any measures in the pipeline for ascertaining what the dangers might be in this respect?
I wish I could give guarantees for many things but unfortunately I am not able to.
We make our judgements from reports like this and the missions we send to check on things like this.
That is what we rely on when we advise people on what to do.
What we have seen is that war affects the environment in the long term and is dangerous.
In the environmental field we have just passed a directive on marine pollution.
That also includes bullets and weapons and so on and it is an early warning system.
Unfortunately we are not able to give guarantees and we can only continue to monitor and try to do the clean-up exercise.
I wanted to ask the Commissioner whether it is true that soldiers of the NATO armed forces now stationed in that region undergo special controls against nuclear radiation and that the same measures are not applied to civilians living in the area?
I cannot answer that question.
When it comes to medical checks and so on, I do not have all the information needed to give a proper answer.
What we know from the environmental side is what I have already mentioned, that there is now an environmental reconstruction plan, but when it comes to medical check-ups I do not have the information about that.
Of course I can go back and see whether we can find the necessary information.
Question No 30 by (H-0793/99):
Subject: Appointment of a European Union envoy for Tibet In 1998 the Tibetan Government in exile received over 4000 Tibetans who escaped over the Himalayan mountains seeking freedom and refuge at risk of life and limb.
Many of the refugees had been severely frost-bitten and many had died along the way.
The Tibet Intergroup is very concerned about the worsening situation in Tibet and it is clear that the current policy of the European Union has proved inadequate to address the grave human rights abuses faced by Tibetans daily in Tibet.
The Tibet Intergroup, therefore, gravely concerned about the continuing human rights abuses in Tibet and supporting the Dalai Lama?s proposal for dialogue with the Chinese Government to resolve the situation in Tibet, calls on the Commission to appoint a Special Envoy for Tibet to address the concerns of the European Union and to help bring the Tibetan and Chinese authorities together for dialogue.
When will the Commission appoint a Special Envoy for Tibet?
Mr Patten has the floor on behalf of the Commission.
The concerns expressed by the European Parliament about Tibet are widely shared.
I have long believed in the need to set out our views on human rights issues, including Tibet, firmly and candidly to the Chinese authorities.
The European Union did that at the European Union­China Summit in Peking last month where we pressed the Chinese on a number of human rights issues, including Tibet.
We again urged the Chinese to begin a dialogue with the Dalai Lama.
I urge the Chinese again to do so.
We will continue to raise Tibet with the Chinese authorities.
We are also doing a number of other things: in the European Union-China human rights dialogue, we have focused on a number of practical steps, including sending experts on assignment to Tibet, planning development assistance programmes and activities focusing on health, education and training for Tibetans.
The appointment of an EU special envoy for Tibet would be primarily a matter for the Council to decide and Parliament might care to take the issue up directly with them.
But for my part, I am not sure that it would add much practical value to our efforts.
It would be unlikely to have much impact on the Chinese authorities and we already have effective channels of communication with the Tibetan community in exile.
I am also keen to guard against an exponential growth in the number of special envoys, however worthy the cause.
Mr President, Mr Patten, of course, you are very well-qualified to comment on account of the time you spent in China, and you are well aware of how hard the Tibetans are trying to initiate a debate, something which has always been blocked hitherto.
However, if your response was to be that we should turn to "Mr CFSP" , that is, to Mr Solana, then I fear that this would constitute a one-sided approach to an external policy matter.
Your approach, which I am very much in favour of, since it is a coherent one, takes its inspiration from the issue of human rights; I wholeheartedly agree that we must embrace the cause of human rights.
Imprisonment, torture, the mutilation of young women and so on and so forth, are definitely issues that we could discuss ad infinitum.
If we cut down here and say that the Council now shares responsibility for this, then I fear that these human rights issues will not be given the attention they deserve.
The possibility of stressing the importance of business and trade in the first place, but also making very sure that we include human rights in the equation, would be a step we should take in tandem with the European Commission, rather than saying that it is a matter for the Council.
Let me make clear to the honourable Member what the position is.
I stated nothing but the truth when I said that the appointment of special envoys was a matter for the Council.
As it happens, we deal with the budgetary consequences, the Council makes the appointment.
Some may think that the budgetary point should be looked at in due course.
Putting that on one side, because that is the situation, it does not mean that we do not have a view and a competence in human rights issues.
I am very much hoping in the next few months that the Commission will be able to produce a communication on human rights pointing out, among other things, that there is no disjunction whatsoever between a regard for human rights in China or other places in the world and the trading and commercial interests and other interests of the European Union.
I have long believed that we should all recognise that countries where it is best to do business are countries that treat their own citizens most decently - everywhere in the world.
I repeat that we have made our position known to the Chinese on Tibet.
During the few months that I have been a Commissioner that has happened twice, first of all in New York at our meeting with Minister Tang and most recently at the meeting in Peking and we will continue to make that concern manifest.
If I can make a literary commendation to the honourable Member, who I recognise is interested in these subjects, I recommend to him a book published just before Christmas written by Isabel Hilton, the distinguished journalist, on the problems of Tibet.
Mr President, I would like to start my additional question with the Tibetan greeting, which betokens peace and happiness.
We are not just talking about human rights and the environment where Tibet is concerned, rather it is about a unique cultural heritage that is also able to communicate important values such as peace, serenity, compassion - as the Dalai Lama would say - to us Europeans.
The question before us now is what can the Commission do to provide more practical support for his Holiness, the Dalai Lama' s, proposal for a peaceful solution to the Tibet affair?
I would point out that doing nothing will be the death of Tibetan culture and will mean the end of the Tibetan people.
I have much sympathy with what the honourable Member has said about cultural heritage and about the Buddhist tradition.
Like the honourable Member I have read the autobiography of the Dalai Lama.
It is an extremely moving account, not just of his responsibilities in and towards Tibet but also of his spiritual views as well.
The Commission, like others, has urged dialogue.
The Dalai Lama has made it clear that peaceful dialogue is what he wishes.
I wish that the Chinese authorities had responded consistently and positively to that overture from the Dalai Lama.
At or around the time of President Clinton's visit to China, the President of the People's Republic of China gave the impression that dialogue was on the agenda.
It would be very beneficial, not just for Tibet and for all those who believe in peace and stability in Asia, but it would also be greatly to the credit of the Government of the People's Republic of China if they were to respond to those attempts to begin a dialogue.
Question No 31 by (H-0795/99):
Subject: Commission's rejection of legislation on proper administration in the EU According to newspaper reports, the Commission has rejected the proposal by EU Ombudsman Jacob Söderman for a citizens? right to proper administration in the EU.
Although the Commission has itself approved the idea of legislation on proper administration, it has not now accepted a detailed proposal that has been made, but has decided to issue a whole set of additional guidelines on improving service.
Are these reports accurate?
What is the reason for the Commission?s acting in this way, and how can it explain the resultant discrepancy between its words and its actions on the reform of EU administration?
Does the Commission consider that what has happened is compatible with the five-point programme agreed between Parliament and the Commission in September, and is it prepared to submit a detailed proposal for legislation on proper administration in a form which allows Parliament to express an opinion on it?
Mr Patten has the floor on behalf of the Commission.
The newspaper reports that the honourable Member made reference to seem to me to be misleading and inaccurate.
In November 1999 the Commission approved at first reading a code of good administrative behaviour to be incorporated into its Rules of Procedure.
At the moment the Commission is consulting its staff representatives on the document, a process which will be finalised in the forthcoming weeks.
The Commission will then adopt the code at second reading.
It should be noted that the new Commission gave an immediate follow-up to the European Ombudsman decision of 28 July 1999 in his own-initiative inquiry related to the code.
The Commission would like to stress in particular that, in the drafting of the code, it has taken on board all the draft recommendations of the European Ombudsman.
The code will be a document exclusively dealing with the relations of the Commission's administration with the public.
It will be adopted through a legally-binding Commission decision to be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
The document has been drawn up taking full account of the provisions contained in the draft prepared by the European Ombudsman's office.
According to the related provisions in the Treaties the responsible legislator for establishing its Rules of Procedure is the Commission itself.
However, it goes without saying that the Commission adheres to the principle of regular political dialogue with the European Parliament on all aspects of administrative reform.
Mr President, I would like to thank the Commissioner.
However, I would still like to ask when this code will finally come into force, bearing in mind that it has been on the agenda since 1997.
The newspaper reports were misleading.
I do not think there is any difference between us and the Ombudsman.
There is a question about the legislative base on which we have taken the best advice and I think we are soundly placed on that.
I want to repeat that honourable Members, like the honourable Member who asked the question, who take a particular interest in this issue, will want to have a dialogue about it.
It is extremely important and I recognise the concern of the honourable Member.
I want to thank the Commission for what I perceive as a very positive answer.
For safety' s sake, I should like to have confirmation that it really is the case that, where the Commission and good administration are concerned, there is no part of Jacob Söderman' s proposal which the Commission thinks is unacceptable.
Is it true that the contents of all parts of the proposal will be approved?
Let me read what it says in my brief - and as it is in my brief it must be true! "I would like to stress again that the Commission has accepted all the Ombudsman's recommendations contained in his draft recommendations of July 1999".
Both documents, that is the Commission's document and the Ombudsman's draft, cover largely the same ground.
The only substantial question that has arisen is the legislative basis.
I can go into that in detail if the honourable Member would like but there is no doubt that we are on all fours with the Ombudsman on this important issue.
We will be happy to incorporate Mr Patten' s notes into the bibliography, as another bedside book for the Members to bear in mind.
As the author is not present, Question No 32 lapses.
I apologise to Mr Vitorino for this parliamentary discourtesy. I am sorry.
According to the Rules of Procedure, you are not required to reply.
I wish you a good evening.
Second Part
Questions to Mr Nielson, who is replaced by Mr Patten
Can I first of all emphasise how sorry my colleague, Mr Nielson, was that he could not be here but the honourable Members who are concerned about these development questions will know how important his mission is, trying to ensure that our agreement with South Africa survives.
The Commission is prepared to look at the possibility of making an introduction to gender and development, part of the so-called induction courses for new staff, something that has been done already but not, I admit, on a regular basis.
The training of staff moving to the delegations in the different regions is another entry point.
The training then would be automatically performed without being compulsory.
We also aim to include training in these issues in the basic training that our officials receive in project cycle management.
As far as possible, we want to see this sort of training automatically built into programmes at the outset, instead of having to be tackled separately and later.
My own view as a former development minister is that these issues should be mainstreamed themselves and tackled at the heart of training and not turned into a sort of optional add-on.
The quest for equality should permeate the work of the Directorate-General for Development at all levels.
It is not to be brought in as a "sort of optional add-on" .
This must naturally lead to a reformulation of development goals and strategies, together with a transformation of institutions and processes so that both women' s and men' s priorities and needs are better reflected.
