We are currently reviewing the options and possibilities for introducing a death penalty resolution in the Human Rights Commission.
This has always been a subject about which I personally have felt extremely strongly, I have always voted against the death penalty.
Spurred on by Amnesty International and others, one of the first decisions I took as Governor of Hong Kong was to abolish the death penalty.
We know what happened recently at the UN General Assembly.
We had to freeze our resolution on the death penalty or risk the passing of a resolution that would have incorporated wholly unacceptable arguments that asserted that human rights are not universally applicable and valid.
The New York stage is different from Geneva.
Last year' s debate in New York on sovereignty and humanitarian intervention was such a sensitive topic that it influenced all other issues.
It certainly influenced the debate on the moratorium on the death penalty.
The debate in Geneva, however, is more focused on human rights issues.
We may therefore stand a better chance of making progress there.
Secondly, Cuba.
I want to address this issue directly because we in Europe are criticised unfairly for not taking human rights there sufficiently seriously.
We are extremely concerned about moves by the Cuban Government over the last year that have further curtailed public freedom, moves like changes in the penal code and the scope of the death penalty.
We are also worried by the recent increase in the number of political detentions.
We are monitoring the human rights situation through the reports of NGOs and the work of our human rights working group based in the EU embassies in Havana.
We have regularly put our criticisms to the Cuban authorities, and this Parliament has done the same.
But I do not believe that the right approach is to try to isolate Cuba.
We want a fair and open society in Cuba, a Cuba which respects the principles of the market, the sanctity of contract and the rule of law.
We want to encourage a process of transition to democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms.
My views are exactly the same when it comes to the third subject with which I wish to deal, namely China.
Quite simply, I want us to be engaged with China.
It would be self-indulgent and self-defeating, as well as insulting to over a fifth of humanity, to want anything else.
I also want to see a China transformed by peaceful change into a free pluralist society which does not lock up democracy activists or religious believers.
So what should we do?
Naturally we should trade enthusiastically with China and hope that we can welcome China into the World Trade Organisation on sensible terms.
It is a misnomer to talk about a World Trade Organisation which does not include China - or Russia, for that matter.
But I do not believe today, nor have I ever believed, that our burgeoning economic relationship with China - manifested, for example, by China' s EUR 25 billion surplus with the European Union - should silence us when it comes to China' s human rights record.
For me the question is not whether we should address the question of human rights in China - we have a duty to do so and a legitimate interest in doing so - but rather what is the most effective way of doing this?
So what should be our attitude towards a Geneva resolution this year?
As the presidency has noted, the Union as a whole is considering its position.
But I strongly suggest there are a number of factors of which the Member States ought to take proper account.
First, while some people question whether tabling a Geneva resolution makes any difference, several of the most distinguished Chinese advocates of democracy strongly believe that it is a valuable move, not least because of the message it sends to people in China itself.
That is a point that deserves serious consideration.
Secondly, we will all want to take proper account of what has actually been happening in China in recent months, for instance, the heavy sentences imposed on democracy campaigners, the detention and recent punishments meted out to members of Christian churches and the arrests and sentences of the members of Falun Gong.
Chinese leaders are in no doubt about our position on all these issues and on developments in Tibet.
We have made our views very clear to them.
While we all know that for many people in China there has been a real long-term improvement in their economic prospects and their social and economic liberties, there is a dark side to the picture as well.
Critics of tabling a resolution say that at least we now have a human rights dialogue with China.
That is true and potentially valuable, although I have to say - and I have said to Chinese officials as has the presidency - that there has not been nearly as much content to our dialogue as we would have liked.
Of course the dialogue has enabled us to identify and implement EU cooperation programmes in the human rights and legal spheres.
That is very welcome and I also believe that our village governance programme should help to promote democracy at grassroots level.
Naturally any dialogue as complex as the one on human rights is going to be a long-term process, but I wish I could point to more real gains.
The next dialogue in Lisbon on 25 February will be an important test.
It will show whether the dialogue is producing results or not.
What, finally, do we want to see as the first steps?
Well, for example, we would like to see China move from signing the UN Conventions on Civil and Political Rights and on Social and Cultural Rights toward actually ratifying them.
I wish we were closer to that.
Where does all that leave us this year?
I repeat that Member States will have to make up their minds.
What I hope is, first, that we in Europe will adopt a common position and stick to it, that we will not allow some to be picked off, that our position will not be based on self-delusion or pretence, that it will be a common position and a sensible position.
I know that some people say we must have a better way of pressing our concern about human rights than through tabling resolutions.
But if that is true, then at the very least we need to be more imaginative and honest with ourselves in looking for that way forward.
If we are to rest our position on the human rights dialogue, then we need to be able to convince you, the NGO community and the public at large that it is actually getting somewhere.
That, in my judgement, is the challenge for the next few weeks.
I am grateful to the House for its concern about human rights around the world, and particularly in China.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Patten.
We will now interrupt the debate on the joint statement concerning the next session of the UN Human Rights Commission and proceed to the vote.
Welcome
I am delighted to welcome a delegation of the Hong Kong Legislative Council to Parliament.
(Loud applause)
VOTE
. As Mrs Wallström explained during yesterday's debate, the Commission is able to accept the following amendments: Amendments Nos 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13.
The Commission can also accept Amendment No 4 in principle.
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 3, 5, 6, 12, 14, 18 and 16.
(The President declared the common position approved as amended)
Report (A5-0023/2000) by Mr Böge, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 91/68/EEC as regards scrapie (COM(1998) 623 - C4-0026/1999 - 1998/0324(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Recommendation (A5-0008/2000) by Ms Cederschiöld, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market on the proposal for a Council decision on the approval, on behalf of the European Community, of the WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty (11221/1999 - COM(1998) 249 - C5 - 0222/1999 - 1998/0141 (AVC))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0015/2000) by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development, on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 70/524/EEC concerning additives in feedingstuffs (COM(1999) 388 - C5-0134/1999 - 1999/0168(CNS))
Before the final vote:
. (DE) Mr President, following this vote, I would like to ask the competent Commissioner, Mr Byrne, if, now that he has seen how much support there is in this Chamber, he is prepared to adopt the proposed amendments?
. I regret to say that I believe that the thought-out position I advanced yesterday is the correct position.
The comprehensive approach that the Commission intends to adopt on this issue will be brought forward as soon as possible under Article 152 where Parliament will have a codecision function.
That is the appropriate way of dealing with this.
Mr President, in accordance with Article 69 (2), I call for referral back to committee.
The reason is that this concerns the approximation of a legal effect measure, as proposed by the Commission.
We have accepted this but have proposed further approximations of the legal effect measures that affect this directive, in particular the adoption of a text - which has been approved by the Commission overall - for the use and labelling of genetically modified organisms.
We take the view that this should form part of this approximation at this time, but the Commission will not adopt this.
I believe that, in accordance with Article 69 (2), we must endeavour to enter into discussion with the Commission, and I would therefore urge my fellow MEPs to decide in favour of referral back to committee.
(Parliament decided to refer the report back to committee)
Report (A5-0034/2000) by Ms Stenzel, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the draft communication from the Commission to the Member States establishing the guidelines for Community Initiative Programmes (CIPs) for which the Member States are invited to submit proposals for support under the EQUAL initiative (COM(1999) 476 - C5-0260/1999 - 1999/2186(COS))
Before the vote:
Mr President, permit me to say quite publicly to Mrs Stenzel, who is a member of the ÖVP executive, that many MEPs are horrified that you have entered into a coalition with Haider, and that we wish to denounce you for doing so!
(Applause from the left. Heckling from the right)
. (DE) Mr Cohn-Bendit, I do not think that the European Parliament has any business intervening to such a huge extent in a country' s domestic politics, in the way that you are doing.
I can speak for my party, which championed Austria' s membership of the European Union in the early days.
As a political force, we serve to guarantee that Austria will continue to embrace European values.
I refuse to allow myself to be ostracised for internal and party political reasons!
This does not reflect the truth of the situation but is pure propaganda.
I utterly reject this!
(Loud, sustained applause from the centre and from the right, protests from the left)
Welcome
This is perhaps an appropriate moment to welcome to the official gallery, a delegation of four members of the Moroccan parliament, led by Mr Brahim Rachidi, Deputy Speaker of the Chamber of Representatives.
We are honoured by the visit of this delegation which is taking place shortly before the entry into force on 1 March 2000 of the Association Agreement between Morocco and the European Union.
On this historic occasion we welcome these developments in our relations and the prospects for closer ties between our two parliaments.
It is in this spirit that the delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries will be visiting Morocco on 20 to 22 March.
I hope the delegation has an excellent visit to Strasbourg.
(Loud applause)
Mr President, I just want to take advantage of your welcome to the delegation by pointing out that the House also has the pleasure of welcoming the heads of the Austrian anti-racist associations who are honouring us with a visit.
(The sitting was suspended at 11.50 a.m. for a formal sitting on the occasion of an address by Mr Vaclav Havel, President of the Czech Republic and resumed at 12.50 p.m.)
VOTE (continuation)
. As regards the Commission's position with respect to the amendments tabled by Parliament I wish to confirm what my colleague stated during the debate in this House on Tuesday, 15 February.
In particular, the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 6, 16, 21, 28, 31, 33, 34, 44, 45, 46, 48, 52, 53, 65, 67, 68, 75, 76, 78, 80, 84, 85, 88 and 102.
The Commission can accept in part Amendments Nos 8, 18, 27, 29, 42, 43, 47, 54, 60, 62, 93, 94, 104 and 105.
The Commission can accept in principle Amendments Nos 2, 3, 5, 7, 10, 12, 14, 17, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 30, 32, 35, 36, 37, 38, 50, 55, 56, 57, 58, 63, 69, 73, 79, 86, 89, 96, 99, 106 and 108.
But the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1, 4, 9, 11, 13, 15, 19, 23, 39, 40, 41, 49, 51, 59, 61, 64, 66, 70, 71, 72, 74, 77, 83, 87, 90, 91, 92, 95, 97, 98, 81(rev.), 100, 101, 103 and 107.
Thank you for your attention.
(The President declared the common position approved as amended)
Report (A5-0033/2000) by Mr Andersson, on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, on the communication from the Commission on a concerted strategy for modernising social protection (COM(1999) 347 - C5-0253/1999 - 1999/2182(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)President.
That concludes the vote
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Lienemann report (A5-0014/2000)
. (FR) I welcome the quality and the ambition of this report on LIFE.
I shall briefly remind you that LIFE is a financial instrument used to support environmental policies within the European Union and also in third countries, whether they be neighbouring countries around the Mediterranean, countries around the Baltic Sea or applicant countries.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has proposed many amendments which have, for the most part, been retained in the common position adopted by the Council.
As far as the third phase of LIFE (2000-2004) is concerned, the instrument is to be divided into three sections, LIFE-Nature (47% of the resources), LIFE-Environment (47%) and LIFE-Third Countries (6%).
In my opinion, the most important amendments concern the following:
LIFE' s contribution to sustainable development within the Community and also to the development of Community policy in the field of the environment, particularly regarding the integration of the environment into other policies, as well as to the implementation and updating of legislation relating to the environment;
Improving the efficiency, transparency and methodology of procedures for the implementation of LIFE, procedures for information and the dissemination of such information to the public, and procedures for cooperation between recipients;
The objectives of LIFE: this must have as its main objective sustainable urban development, in close association with the pilot projects carried out under the URBAN initiative, on which I have had the opportunity to speak elsewhere;
The contribution that the projects supported by LIFE make to the sustainability of social and economic activities, and thus job creation.
I consider it crucial that the LIFE instrument should remain open to the participation of candidate countries from central and eastern Europe.
The other candidate countries (e.g. Cyprus, Turkey, Malta) my also take part in LIFE when agreements permitting such participation are signed with these countries.
The stumbling block in the negotiations with the Council lies, of course, in the amount of the total appropriation allocated for the third phase of the LIFE programme (2000-2004).
The Commission proposal, ratified by the Council, is for EUR 613 million, whilst the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection considers that the budget should be EUR 850 million.
I support Mrs Lienemann' s firm stance.
The financial allocation has not in fact been upgraded since the programme was created, even when the membership of the EC was increased to fifteen Member States following enlargement.
If the report is adopted in plenary session, then conciliation proceedings will have to be opened, in accordance with the codecision procedure, in order to solve the problem of the amount of appropriations earmarked for the programme.
This type of procedure is common practice since the programmes or legislative measures are too often allocated budgets which do not live up to their ambitions!
Böge report (A5-0023/2000)
. (FR) As an MEP and, more importantly, as a consumer, I welcome the European Commission' s proposal as a step in the direction of enhanced food safety within the European Union.
This proposal has two objectives: first, to amend the 1991 Council Directive on animal health conditions by removing the provisions on scrapie and, secondly, to introduce a new regulation establishing rules for preventing and combating transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE) or BSE-type diseases affecting sheep and other animal species.
What is interesting abut this new legislation is that a specific legal basis is being created in order to combat scrapie.
What is even more satisfactory is that this was one of our main demands in our follow-up report on the mad cow crisis.
I also consider it essential, for the sake of coherence, that existing legislation on scrapie, which is limited to the trade in ovine and caprine animals, should be incorporated in a single and complete set of new rules on TSE affecting all animals throughout the European Union, rules designed to prevent the consumption of foodstuffs or feedingstuffs.
These rules are all the more welcome in that doubts still persist as regards scrapie.
A number of scientific hypotheses maintain that scrapie developed into BSE in cows and therefore caused the BSE epidemic.
Even if this proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation to prevent and combat certain TSE needs to be made more accurate and more effective, especially as regards detecting and fighting scrapie, it is still a notable improvement.
It is a pledge to European citizens, who have voiced their concern, as regards European food policy, on many occasions.
The European Parliament has relayed their concerns and they have been heard.
As a result of the debates on the principle of precaution, traceability, responsibility and transparency, the European Commission has presented a White Paper on food safety.
This White Paper sets out several areas of concern and proposes the creation of an independent European Food Authority as part of a European strategy to restore consumer confidence.
It is up to us, as responsible Europeans, to prove that the single market and the free movement of goods and food safety are not mutually exclusive.
Cederschiöld report (A5-0008/2000)
Mr President, I voted for this initiative to amend the copyright legislation because I believe it is one of the most important sectors within the remit of the European Parliament.
In my view, products of the mind are far more valuable than tangible products, namely, those that can be seen and touched.
The fruits of the intellect and science, which are intangible, are of inestimable importance. Therefore, the European Community should be more energetic in providing practical encouragement, not just through upholding patents but through concessions and other forms of support for scientists who are striving, through the knowledge and experience they have acquired, to give future generations something better than that which they have today.
. (DA) We oppose, on principle, the European Community' s entering into treaties on copyright law on behalf of the Member States.
We are nonetheless aware that we are concerned here with a sharing of powers between the Member States and the Community. At the same time, we appreciate the fact that the WIPO treaties are a significant step forward in the direction of guaranteeing the rights of distributors and practising artists.
