You have to admit: this is a joke.
Tomorrow, we might opt in favour of a weak and permissive framework which ruins the future of our children.
Either we opt for the amendments of my group, of the rapporteur or the Committee on the Environment.
I would like to finish off with this observation.
In the past couple of months, we have witnessed a great deal of lobbying in Belgium.
What was remarkable about this dossier was the enormous pressure from the Council of Ministers.
In our own country, this pressure was exerted by both Flemish and Wallonian Environment administrations.
They have opted for the weak common position in favour of our Parliament' s more drastic positioning.
I really do wonder whether this is an approach of which the green Environment Ministers in my country are aware.
Ladies and gentlemen, fine words are no longer sufficient.
We need to change tack completely.
During the vote tomorrow, we can make it clear that Europe is drafting a responsible and future-orientated water policy.
This can only benefit our credibility.
The debate is suspended and will resume at 9 p.m.
The dialogue on Europe - institutional reform
The next item is the Commission communication - The dialogue on Europe - institutional reform: the issues at stake.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the Commission is discussing this issue right now but it will be very surprising if its work is completed today. I am basically here to speak to you, as indicated by your agenda, on a new initiative which the Commission is proposing as just one of its responses to the major challenge of institutional reform.
This reform must involve all the actors in European construction, with yourselves as MEPs at the forefront but also myself as a Commissioner, the Council ministers and national MPs. It must also involve the officials who work in our various institutions and who are committed to and motivated by this European construction.
This morning, in the lengthy debate which I attended with Mr Prodi, many of you mentioned the lack of democracy and remoteness of the European institutions.
Yet it is not just a question of who does what, as one of you said very clearly and forcefully.
Ensuring that our citizens understand who does what in our various institutions is the very least we can do.
We must also now explain what we are doing together and what we want to do together in the future, particularly with the countries which will be joining us.
We too are concerned about this lack of democracy, and the Commission has therefore decided to launch the 'Dialogue on Europe' in order to play its part in this direct contact with the people. This initiative will be launched on the day after the opening of the Intergovernmental Conference.
During the IGC I will have the honour of representing the Commission together with Mr Prodi and of working closely with your two representatives, Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos. All the Commissioners have undertaken to use some of their time when they go to any country or region, and not just their own, which in my case happens three or four times a month, to engage in direct dialogue with the public, and not just with the élite or those in power whom we meet as a matter of course.
We also plan to establish direct contacts in universities, schools and factories, to meet the people, answer their questions and listen to them. In this way we will play our part, as will you, in making the necessary effort and meeting the urgent obligation to reduce the democratic deficit and the remoteness of our citizens from what we do.
We hope to conduct this initiative in cooperation with the Member States and in conjunction with the European Parliament.
We will produce a regular summary of this initiative so that public opinion can be measured and we can adjust or reorient the work.
We also hope to conduct this initiative in consultation with the national parliaments, local elected representatives, non-governmental organisations, socio-professional organisations and the media.
Opinion multipliers, political groups and parties, MEPs and national MPs, elected representatives, as I have just said, local authorities or national parliaments, the Committee of the Regions, the Economic and Social Committee, organisations stemming from civil society and university and education circles will all be involved.
Need I remind you that the European Parliament itself took the initiative on 1 February? I must again thank Mr Napolitano for organising an initial working meeting with the representatives of the national parliaments who are, of course, the representatives of the people in each Member State.
The Commission will propose that the Member States become involved in this exercise either as part of ad hoc cooperation or a more structured partnership.
We are setting up a media plan and close contacts with the European Union Presidency and the European Parliament.
I have indicated the conditions under which the Commissioners will play their part through public meetings and visits.
We want to encourage debate among the people.
Without presuming to lecture you - God forbid - or even advise you, may I just point out that, when it was my honour to be Minister for European Affairs in my own country, I saw the need to establish a direct dialogue with the people? Each week, when engaging in this dialogue in each region, I realised that there was a real need for the European Union to have a face.
I therefore took a European Commissioner, and not just the French ones, or ambassadors posted in Paris or MEPs to engage in this dialogue each week. This made me realise that people had many intelligent questions and that they needed to be respected, listened to and informed.
So this is what we are going to do.
We will have a budget of approximately EUR 4 million for 2000 which you will hopefully approve.
Financing from the 2001 budget must also be negotiated as we want this initiative not just to be an experiment but to last throughout both 2000 and 2001. It will therefore be ongoing throughout the negotiation of the Intergovernmental Conference and the ratification process.
We will launch this dialogue on 8 March in Brussels in the presence of 700 young Commission stagiaires.
Your President, Mrs Fontaine, has agreed to take part with Mr Prodi and several Commissioners in this initial dialogue. I can assure you that, whenever a Commissioner intends to engage in dialogue, the most immediately available MEPs will also be able to take part in order to give their point of view and explain the work and role of the European Parliament.
That is all I have to say for the moment.
I welcome any questions, suggestions or proposals from the Members present.
Colleagues, you know the rules.
You are expected to ask questions, not necessarily make lengthy statements.
You have one minute each in which to ask your question.
Mr President, I think I also speak for the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that I chair, in expressing my appreciation of this Commission initiative.
Moreover, this initiative is consistent with recommendations made by Parliament itself in its resolution of 18 November.
I have also heard Commissioner Barnier' s clarification of relations and links with the European Parliament during the implementation of this programme.
If I may make a suggestion, Commissioner Barnier, would it be possible for the communication to say something more on this subject, in addition to the straightforward and slightly clinical phrase which indicates that it will be carried out in conjunction with the European Parliament?
It would be helpful to stress this convergence of intentions and efforts because I can see a particular problem with coordination, specifically between the Commission initiative - which certainly does not only address members of national parliaments, but also members of national parliaments - and our committee' s programme. Following the working meeting of 1 February, which Commissioner Barnier referred to and which benefited from the weighty contribution of the Commission, the committee intends to take stock of developments at the Intergovernmental Conference at all of its meetings.
We therefore hope to benefit from the capable and consistent participation of members of national parliaments at all of our meetings, and this will be a channel which will ably supplement the ones in the Commission' s initiative.
Thank you, Mr Napolitano.
I can confirm that our proposal is completely within the spirit of the resolution of 18 November.
I also want at this stage to say that I was able to propose this initiative to the Commission thanks to the cooperation and understanding of my colleague, Viviane Reding. This initiative was also established in conjunction with GÌnter Verheugen as it involves all the major challenges of enlargement, both its opportunities and risks, and of institutional reform.
These challenges must be explained to our citizens who are concerned about them and questioning them.
I understand your concern, Mr Napolitano, and an interinstitutional working group will be set up. Its first meeting should take place in March.
I will ensure that we go further than the rather dry terms of the Commission' s text and it will certainly be more a question of sharing the work than working in liaison with each other. I will also ensure that over the next two years we can coordinate the initiatives taken by yourselves and ourselves which will be separate but joint.
You realise that making a success of this dialogue means work for everyone concerned.
Mr President, Commissioner, it is music to my ears to hear you use the word 'citizen' so often.
We are increasingly concerned in this House about public opinion. The fear of public opinion is a rather paternalistic concept but our House is what it is and we must do what we can with it.
In terms of the IGC issue, I have a specific question for you. I believe that the Court of Justice in Luxembourg is currently looking very closely at the important issue of the fight against fraud and OLAF.
As you know, there are problems which not only concern this House but also the European officials who are also European citizens.
Given the urgency surrounding this issue, has the Commission considered the possibility of completely changing the structure of the anti-fraud office by moving to a solution which would entail the fight against fraud, in the Member States and in the European institutions, coming under the jurisdiction of the Court of Justice?
Mr Dupuis, first of all I attach a great deal of importance in my public life to the word 'citizen' .
It is one of the most wonderful words in a democracy and must be used.
We will conduct this dialogue with our citizens, including the most disadvantaged and those isolated from decision-making or information centres.
With regard to the IGC and this issue of the fight against fraud, and specifically fraud against the Community budget and interests, we have retained the idea in our proposals of creating a new and specific post of a European public prosecutor. We have done this in the spirit of this House' s work and perhaps by going down the same road.
This public prosecutor would have the authority, recognised by the EU Treaty and therefore by the Member States, to investigate thoroughly any case threatening the Community budget and interests.
We can clearly and almost clinically see that legal cooperation is now no longer enough to fight against this fraud whether it originates from inside or outside the Community. This is why we have proposed the creation of a European public prosecutor who could, having investigated a case from start to finish, then have this investigated and ruled on by the most appropriate national court.
In reply to your second point on the Court of Justice, we have not yet established our position on the Court of Justice because we were waiting for the Dur report which was published a few days ago.
The Commission, as I have promised, will complete its proposals on the IGC opinion about the legal system and the Court of Justice within the next few weeks.
Mr President, Mr Commissioner, the day before yesterday, there was a leading news item in the most popular Danish news programme, which I would ask you to comment on.
The story went that an official in the Commission had apparently told an Austrian businessman that, because he was Austrian, he would possibly be excluded from being able to participate in a scientific development project together with businesses in other countries, including Denmark.
I would ask you to confirm that, if an official has said that an Austrian company is in some way excluded from participating in joint development projects, then this official has got the wrong end of the stick, and that, if he has not said this, then there is no story.
Will you confirm what is the case?
Mr Haarder, to my knowledge no official has been authorised to say such a thing.
My personal opinion is that it would be wrong and unfair to penalise the Austrian people, businesses and employees because of concerns prompted by the establishment in Austria of a new government coalition.
Therefore, subject to verification which I or someone else will give immediately after this sitting, I can confirm what you have just said, that the Commission has never said or authorised anything of this sort.
Generally speaking, there are other lessons to be learnt from what is happening in Austria. I have myself suggested various possible responses to this challenge which serves to remind us all once more what we have been doing together since 1957.
This is an economic community, of course, but it is also, primarily, a community of values.
This is why we are drawing up a Charter of Fundamental Rights which will more widely and more clearly protect our citizens on an individual basis. This is why we have Article 13 of the EC Treaty on discrimination which we proposed, in our opinion of 26 January even before the Austrian crisis, should be applied after the IGC by qualified majority rather than by unanimity.
This is why I personally have an idea to supplement Article 7 of the EU Treaty with a new paragraph which would give the democratic warning or monitoring procedure a legal basis. Finally, this is why we have public debate.
The only way to eliminate misconceived ideas is to offer alternatives, which brings me back to the subject of our discussion. I firmly believe in the democratic force and value of debate, particularly to fight against demagoguery.
Commissioner Barnier, you laid great stress in your statement on the importance of dialogue with the citizens of Europe.
With reference to the IGC, as you know, under the Helsinki decisions the Portuguese Presidency was given the specific entitlement to add to the agenda of the IGC during the course of the IGC.
Clearly, Parliament has its own representatives present, Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos.
But would you, Commissioner, also be in a position to give an undertaking that if and when the agenda is enlarged by the Council you would report this to Parliament so that we could discuss it amongst ourselves and indeed with you, with the intention of continuing that dialogue with the citizens on which you have laid such stress?
Mr Beazley, my answer is clearly yes but that is no surprise.
Mr Napolitano, the chairman, and many other members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and even more MEPs in this House know that, on behalf of the Commission, I will be available to tell you how things are going as they happen throughout these negotiations, in a spirit of transparency.
I will perhaps say this differently from Mr Tsatsos and Mr Brok who are your direct representatives but it is also probable that, in many cases, we will say this together.
It is very important that these negotiations is not secretive with the European Parliament or the national parliaments which, when all said and done, will have their opinions to give and their positions to take in the ratification process.
This is why I congratulate Mr Napolitano' s initiative for regular joint consultation between the national parliaments of the Fifteen and the European Parliament.
Having said that, the duty of transparency and debate starts here with regard to the reform of the institutions.
I will therefore be available whenever you want in order to inform you of our positions and the progress being made in these negotiations throughout this year.
Mr President, firstly I would like to compliment the Commission on its approach.
I think it is extremely useful to open up the communication channels with the citizen at an early stage. This did not really happen for the Treaty of Amsterdam or the Treaty of Maastricht and this has only led to a great deal of mistrust.
I have two questions. Firstly, you mentioned that you will start a two-way dialogue with the citizens and I am already making a start with the 700 placement students at the European Commission.
Do you intend to address the citizens via the media as well, that is to say via the television and Internet?
My second question is of a critical nature.
The European Commission has just issued a proposal on transparency.
If I compare this with the transparency proposal which pertains to legislation in the Netherlands, then the European model is vastly overshadowed by the Dutch model, and that proposal has met with a lot of criticism in the Netherlands.
My question is really: how do you intend to organise transparency with regard to the IGC, because the present directive is not a good example of this.
Mrs Maij-Weggen, given that we are talking about ensuring transparency in the IGC, it is clear how business will be conducted and the negotiations are starting right now.
The group of representatives is currently meeting in Brussels and I will try to join them as soon as possible.
The documents will in the main be open working documents.
Although the negotiation sessions which will take place throughout the year between ministers and the European Council will not be open to the media, I am committed, as I must be at this stage, to ensuring this transparency and reporting in the most appropriate arenas on these negotiations and the Commission' s viewpoint.
I can confirm, and thank you for having asked me about this, that we will use all the most modern means, television in particular, to broadcast our public debates in each country and even across Europe.
We will open an Internet forum and create permanent discussion forums.
The Commissioners will undertake to respond rapidly to any questions raised.
These are the modern means to be used.
However, I believe we must also make the effort to get as close as possible to the people.
Although this may be a rather Utopian ideal, I want a Commissioner, when he can, an MEP, a minister to attend public debates in all the regions of Europe.
I have evidence that this is possible.
The majority of you hold these debates in your constituencies and regions.
Although this may seem rather egotistical, I want the Commission, in the minds of the people, to have a face and for those people forming the Commission to be able to meet our citizens as often as possible.
Mr President, I welcome Mr Barnier' s commitment to go to the regions, both to explain and to listen to what citizens have to say.
I would like to invite him to my own region of Yorkshire, a major European region that is a full participant in the single European market and a major recipient of European structural funding.
He can come with both the hats that he wears as a Commissioner.
I would like to ask him how vigorous the Commission will be in this information campaign?
In some Member States it is not just a matter of providing information to a public that is not as well informed as it might be.
That is certainly important but it is also a question of combating the misinformation that is put around by a very active anti-European movement and anti-European organisations that exist.
The Commission will have to be very vigorous in the responses that it puts out to some of the comments that it will be receiving as part of the campaign.
Mr Corbett, thank you for your comments.
I willingly accept your invitation. If I have understood you correctly, you want me, when I come to Yorkshire, to talk not only about the reform of the European institutions but also the Structural Funds.
I can perform this dual task.
I forgot to mention my intention to go before the national parliaments, as I have already done, not only by meeting their representatives here but by going to see them in situ.
Ten days ago I was in Westminster, so you can see, Mr Corbett, that I am not afraid of the difficulties.
Next week I will go to the Bundestag in Berlin.
I have already appeared before the French Senate.
Therefore, throughout this debate, whenever I can, I will go directly to see the national parliaments too.
With regard to the dialogue with our citizens, it is not a question of propaganda or marketing, nor even of communication.
I want this dialogue to be a real dialogue. So, after a short film objectively explaining the challenges of institutional reform, those in the public gallery can participate in an open discussion.
I will say again that we are going to conduct this dialogue initiative through specific cooperation or a more structured partnership with the Member States. I sincerely hope, with your support, that the governments of the Fifteen will participate in this dialogue initiative in the manner which they consider most appropriate.
Mr President, I should like to join Mr Barnier' s study group with the 700 trainees so that he has some people to discuss matters with.
It is not much fun, of course, having to discuss transparency and intergovernmental conferences with yourself.
In connection with the Intergovernmental Conference, Mr Barnier said, during his presentation in Parliament, that social policy was not to be subject to majority decision-making but, when I look at page 63, I see that rights of travel and of residence - that is to say, the Residence Directives - ,combating discrimination, the whole of social security and the renewal of Regulation No 1408 and, with a few exceptions, of arrangements in the socio-political sphere are to be subject to qualified majority voting.
Is not Mr Barnier nervous about penetrating the inner workings of the Member States' election processes?
It is, of course, these issues which people go to the polls about and which lead to new majorities in the Folketing and other parliaments.
Can such matters be controlled from Brussels?
Is this an element in the radical decentralisation which Mr Prodi talked about this morning?
I was very glad to learn last week that the Commission is giving close attention over a number of years to the concept of subsidiarity and its reference, not merely to relations between the Union and Member States, but also the Union, the Member States, regions and cities.
I hope that in his pursuit of dialogue around the regions of Europe, Commissioner Barnier will expand upon that thought and learn from what he hears.
Commissioner, I want to go back to one of your previous answers. In this you mentioned what I would refer to as the possibilities of protecting the EU Treaty against any risks of deviation and, in particular, the variation of penalties which may be imposed on a Member State, pursuant to Article 7, for the violation of fundamental freedoms.
Do you believe that these proposals, or proposals of this type, form part of the mandate of the IGC as defined in Helsinki?
I do not think so.
Are you not afraid that such penalties might get out of hand and serve to punish not violations of human rights but simple differences of opinion, unpopular opinions or deviations from the dominant European thinking?
Yes, Mr Bonde, we will be starting this debate with 700 young people in Brussels who are going to be working in the institutions and with the Commission.
I believe that it will be good to start this dialogue with young people who are motivated.
In terms of social protection, I can confirm that we have made proposals about qualified majority or unanimous voting but these are regardless of ideology.
