This will therefore be our rule.
We are proposing that decisions on certain policies or measures involving taxation or social protection and social security should be taken by qualified majority voting when there is a direct link with the proper operation of the internal market. Our proposal is not general or systematic.
I am well aware of the sensitivity of these taxation and social protection issues.
I do not believe that all the national systems of social protection should be made identical.
This has never been the case. We are simply trying to ensure, in a Europe with 30 or 27 Member States, the best conditions for the operation of the internal market without one country being able to block the other 26 or 27.
Mr MacCormick, I agree that this dialogue must reach beyond the national capitals.
It must get as close as possible to the people, where they live and where they have their roots.
If I said anything different I would be contradicting myself as Commissioner for Regional Policy which is one of the most specific and most visible policies for increasing employment and improving the quality of life of people in their regions. You will often hear me say that this policy does not just have one main objective of achieving cohesion and solidarity between the regions but that it is intended in addition to help people, where they live, to preserve their roots, traditions, soul and identity.
We will therefore conduct this dialogue with the towns and regions.
Mr Berthu, the Helsinki mandate is clear and we are working within this.
It specifies that we must deal firstly and as a priority with the three basic issues which were left out in Amsterdam.
It also adds related institutional questions and issues which may be included in the negotiations depending on the Portuguese and French presidencies.
The Commission is acting correctly if, on a particular point, it believes it must add to its opinion which covers many institutional questions. I am not yet sure that we will do this on Article 7.
However, if we do, this will not be solely in response or as a reaction to an economic situation which is sufficiently serious that the fourteen governments of the Union must mobilise together to give their response. We will also do this with regard for the future in general.
We will use all the means available to permanently strengthen the community of values which we have been building together since the founding of the Union in 1957, and even before that, on the rubble of the Second World War.
Everything which can be done will be useful. I am sure that you and I, Mr Berthu, can at least agree on this.
Thank you, Commissioner.
You have answered the questions precisely and also opened the dialogue for Europe that you referred to.
You have set a very good example of time-keeping today.
That concludes the debate.
Question Time (Commission)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0009/2000). We will examine questions to the Commission.
First part
Question No 36 by (H-0025/00):
Subject: High infant mortality in Kosovo According to the latest UN data received from the World Health Organisation, Kosovo has the highest rate of infant mortality in Europe; almost 50% of babies born prematurely die, while the war has produced a steep rise in miscarriages and children who manage to go to term are smaller than the norm.
In the context of the humanitarian aid provided by the Union and the efforts of its envoy Bernard Kouchner, will the Commission say what measures have been taken to safeguard the women of Kosovo's right to motherhood and the health of pregnant women, women in childbirth and babies?
Mr President, the Commission is conscious of the very difficult situation concerning health and health facilities in Kosovo, not just for pregnant women but across the board.
This results both from the recent conflict and from the years of neglect and lack of maintenance that preceded it.
The statistics quoted on child mortality speak for themselves and are wholly unacceptable.
However, the situation is hardly better for other parts of the population.
The Commission' s response has been as follows: firstly, the health sector has been a significant beneficiary of ECHO funding.
ECHO is currently focusing on the provision of medical supplies and emergency health care, on support to institutions as well as vaccination.
However, efforts are increasingly oriented towards the establishment of a self-sufficient healthcare system in the province.
UNMIK has already taken a significant role in this field.
Secondly, under the reconstruction programme, urgent intervention at the hospital in Mitrovica has already been initiated with a EUR 1 million rehabilitation programme.
Progress is slow due to the tense relations between the ethnic groups of this divided city.
However, the Commission is maintaining its efforts with the support of UNMIK for this project.
We hope that one day it may become a symbol promoting the benefits of ethnic reconciliation.
Under the European Community' s damage assessment, estimated costs of the reconstruction of healthcare facilities and provision of equipment to dispensaries and health houses amount to EUR 4 million.
The Commission is now turning to the programming of 2000 funds.
We expect to dedicate a considerable sum to improving the healthcare system.
The emphasis will be on long-term reforms covering health financing as well as training and procurement.
Work is already under way with UNMIK to determine an appropriate contribution from the Commission to this enterprise.
Commissioner, this morning President Prodi, among others, stressed that the Balkans are testing our ability to act effectively, the very credibility of the European Union is on trial, and the gap between words and deeds must finally be closed.
Commissioner, do you really think that the facts we have about high infant mortality in Kosovo - the highest in Europe - and more generally the picture of human misery and destruction that prevails in Kosovo, are not already damaging our credibility and casting doubt on our ability to live up to our promises?
Besides, Commissioner, is so-called humanitarian military intervention justified by the present picture of human destruction in Kosovo?
Do you think that so much inaction is excusable when, on the continent of Europe itself, the right to life is at risk?
I do not think that our reconstruction agency or the task force before it, which have been working incredibly hard in Kosovo, would regard it as an adequate description of their labours to suggest that they had been standing idly by.
I am sure the honourable Member did not mean that.
Of course, she is entirely correct in saying that the Union' s credibility is on the line with what happens, not just in Kosovo but in the Balkans as a whole.
I am very concerned that the assistance we provide should arrive expeditiously and in a way which can maximise our assistance.
I would just make two points about the situation in Kosovo which we are addressing as enthusiastically as we can along WHO lines.
First of all, I am sure that the honourable Member recognises that over the period of the 1990s the government in Belgrade underfunded the health service in Kosovo, and many Albanians found that they were not really receiving any health care at all.
As a result of that, a parallel health care system was put in place through the Mother Teresa Society.
So what we are dealing with is not just the consequences of conflict but the consequences of years of neglect and chronic under-investment.
Secondly, and I am sure that the honourable Member recognises this as well, some of the tragic stories to come out of Kosovo in recent weeks have not been about child mortalities during carriage of a baby, but child mortality after a healthy baby has been born.
Those were cases in which women who during the hostilities, or before the hostilities, tragically killed their own children.
We are dealing with a horrific story in Kosovo.
We have to work as well as we can in the health care field and in others to restore something approaching civilised standards and civilised behaviour, but it is not going to be easy.
Commissioner, I would like to thank you for your response to the Member' s first question and the supplementary question.
However, I still have some contacts in Kosovo who have informed me that food packages which are distributed by ECHO, among others, are often of inferior quality.
In some cases, there have been incidents of food containing insects and such like.
Are you aware of this?
Are you prepared to act upon it?
This is my first additional question.
My second question pertains to the reconstruction of the hospital in Mitrovica.
You are perhaps aware that this hospital is located in the Northern part of the city and that, given the tense situation, Albanian Kosovars do not have any access to this section at all.
What does the Commission intend to do in order to ensure that Albanian Kosovars too can get to hospital?
On the first question, I am going myself to Kosovo at the beginning of next month for another visit and I will certainly look into the allegation made by the honourable Member about the ECHO food package.
I have not heard that suggestion before, but it is an important point and I will certainly investigate it when I am there.
Secondly, I do understand exactly what the honourable Member is saying about Mitrovica.
I was in Mitrovica a couple of months ago, I saw the situation there for myself.
I had discussions with municipal leaders from both communities, including the leader of the Albanian side who had himself in the past been a doctor and was generally recognised for the medical work he had done during the hostilities and subsequently.
So I know the very serious problems that exist in that hospital and I can assure the honourable Member that we will be doing all that we can to see that adequate health facilities are available for everybody in Kosovo, whatever ethnic group they come from.
The particular difficulties in Mitrovica - for example, it is not just a question of Albanian patients having difficulty getting to hospital, Albanian staff have had difficulty working there - are particularly acute problems.
We will try to address them, but it is not easy.
Question No 37 by (H-0029/00):
Subject: Turkish blockade of Armenia Given that the European Union is actively promoting social, economic and political relations with Armenia through the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement signed on 12 October 1999, what steps is the Commission taking to persuade the Turkish Government to lift the economic blockade of Armenia?
The Commission supports any effort aimed at the settlement of the disputes between Turkey and Armenia and regrets that there has not yet been any normalisation of relations between these two countries.
In the present political circumstances it is however unrealistic to imagine that the border between Armenia and Turkey, as well as the one between Armenia and Azerbaijan could be opened without settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict.
Mr President, the Commission will be holding negotiations in the future on the accession of Turkey to the European Union.
Will it make it a condition that negotiations can only start if the blockade is lifted because, in the final analysis, we are all neighbours and we want to cultivate positive neighbourly relations inside the European Union?
My question therefore is this: will the Commission make this one of the conditions in order to improve future discussions?
The key issue is to support the efforts of the OSCE Minsk group to find a settlement to the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict and we stand ready to help in any way we can.
We have also been substantial contributors of development assistance under the TACIS programme to Armenia.
Let me relate my answer specifically to the question of Turkish accession to the European Union.
The situation of Turkey's relations with its neighbours will, as the honourable Member asks, be closely examined in the framework of the pre-accession strategy.
As stated in Agenda 2000 - and I quote: "Enlargement should not mean importing border conflicts".
That statement could not be much clearer.
But I repeat that the most important contribution we can make is to try to assist in the resolution of that conflict which has had such harmful economic and humanitarian results.
Question No 38 by (H-0040/00):
Subject: Implications for human rights of the construction of the Ilisu Dam in Turkey Given that Turkey has recently been granted applicant country status, what is the Commission's view of the implications for human rights of the construction of the Ilisu Dam, given the massive displacement of the Kurdish and the other people of the region that will result?
The Commission has no information regarding the impact of the construction of the Ilisu Dam on the population of the region.
We will, however, consider raising the matter with the Turkish authorities, together with other issues concerning regional development policies in the framework of the new pre-accession strategy for Turkey.
I have a related point.
It concerns the implications of the dam on access to fresh water in the region as a whole.
As you know, the dam will limit the supply of fresh water to Syria and to Iraq in particular.
Given the extreme volatility of this region and given the very real concerns of many commentators that we will see an increased incidence of conflict, of so-called "water wars", in the coming decades, what is the Commission's view about the potential destabilisation, both in Turkey and in the wider region, that will be caused by this dam?
Can you say whether you will indeed raise this point as well?
We will certainly raise the point made by the honourable Member.
We have heard anxieties expressed on that point and I will ensure it is taken up.
There have also been considerable anxieties expressed about the potential danger to the archaeological heritage in the area.
We will raise that, too, in the representations we make.
A number of other hydro-electric schemes planned over the last 30 years in Turkey have raised matters of concern, such as the effect on displaced farmers.
On the whole those seem to have been dealt with relatively satisfactorily and I hope that the same can be true of this project which - just to make the point clear - is not a project in which the Commission is participating in any form.
Question No 39 by (H-0036/00):
Subject: Drafting of Charter of Fundamental Rights The general public welcomes the fact that a Charter of Fundamental Rights is to be drawn up. It is also to be hoped that it will meet the challenges of Europe in the 21st century.
What are the Commission's views on the substance of the Charter? What type of rights will the Charter set out (economic, social and cultural)?
Which citizens will it cover (those of the European Union or the citizens of all European countries with a view to enlargement? Will it cover immigrants etc.?)
Will it set out established social rights in the European Union or will it set a broader agenda?
What means will the Charter use to ensure that it clearly guarantees equality between the sexes?
What are the Commission's views on incorporating the Charter into the Treaty on European Union?
Like the honourable Member, the Commission welcomes the decision taken by the Heads of State and Government to start the process of drawing up a European Charter of Fundamental Rights. In the conclusions of the Cologne European Council the Heads of State and Government even established the broad outlines of the Charter' s content.
According to these conclusions, the Charter must contain three categories of rights. The first category is rights of freedom and equality and procedural rights, as guaranteed by the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
The second is the rights reserved for citizens of the European Union. The third is economic and social rights, as contained in the European Social Charter and the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers, insofar as they do not merely establish objectives for action by the Union.
The Commission considers that the Convention responsible for drawing up the Charter of Fundamental Rights must respect the mandate given by the Cologne European Council.
Having said that, this does not mean that the Convention should be limited to a codifying role of simply compiling the existing rights from various sources.
As I have said before in this House, the Commission is convinced that the Convention must be able, if necessary, to adapt and develop these rights in view of current circumstances, particularly technological and social changes.
However, given the mandate and the final objective of the text to be submitted to the Heads of State and Government, this power must be exercised with caution and on a case-by-case basis.
The rights conferred by this Charter will have at least two types of beneficiary.
Some rights will apply to anyone present in the EU territory while others will benefit only citizens of the European Union.
It may also be envisaged that some economic and social rights could be guaranteed only for citizens of the European Union and third-country nationals meeting certain conditions.
It is not possible at this initial stage of the process of drawing up the Charter to prejudge its content in more detail.
However, I can confirm that the principle of equal opportunity and equal treatment between men and women will certainly be included among the rights guaranteed by the future European Charter of Fundamental Rights. This is because this principle already figures among the rights guaranteed by the EC Treaty and by secondary legislation and because it undoubtedly constitutes a common constitutional tradition in the Member States.
As I have also said before to this House, the Commission is favourable to inserting the Charter in the EU Treaty.
However, we are fully aware that the final decision on this matter will fall to the Heads of State and Government.
The difficult part, which will fall to the Convention, is therefore to draw up an ambitious and politically significant text which can be integrated as such into the Treaties.
In its opinion on the holding of an Intergovernmental Conference to amend the Treaties, the Commission noted that the European Council must decide during the year 2000 on the inclusion of certain items on the IGC agenda, in particular the European Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Commissioner, it is quite significant that at the beginning of this new century people in Europe, men and women, are being called upon to redefine their rights and obligations.
We hope that this important Cologne Council decision will become a reality.
Globalisation on the one hand and enlargement on the other, make it urgently necessary to define those rights.
Seattle is a real source of concern in that context and we hope that the European Council in Nice will not be a wasted meeting.
But if we are to secure the public' s participation in this new planning, we would like to learn what plan the European bodies and specifically the Commission are proposing as the social and democratic model of Europe in the twenty-first century.
I listened to your general guidelines and I would like to ask you what is the position of children, as entities in their own right, in the Commission' s plans for the new model of society in the twenty-first century.
Mr President, Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, in my opinion, and as Mr Prodi said this morning, the drawing up of the Charter is an exercise with great political significance. This is because it shows that the Union places the fundamental rights of citizens at the top of the political concerns for the future of our common project.
In this context, the criteria by which these rights are to be chosen must be clearly indicated.
The essential criterion is the rights of citizens with regard to the European institutions, as contained in the European project enshrined in the Treaties of the European Union.
I understand your concern about the rights of children.
Many elements of our work, and particularly of my work as Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs, involve protecting the rights of children.
This is an area in which the principle of subsidiarity applies fully.
Each Member State is principally responsible for defining its responsibilities towards children.
As for the EU' s responsibility, the rights of children must be recognised in the Charter according to the areas in which the Union can give added value to the promotion of the social and economic situation and even the citizenship, in its broadest sense, of children.
I hope we can meet the challenge which the honourable Member has posed for the Commission and the whole Convention.
Mr President, I have had the privilege of hearing the Commissioner a number of times on this issue and I very much agree with his approach.
However, I should like to ask a slightly different question.
We have just heard Commissioner Barnier say that he is anxious to communicate better with the people and to aim the information policy of the Commission towards the major issues that the Community is dealing with this year.
Would the Commissioner argue for some of the information budget of the Commission to be put towards informing and consulting the citizens on this issue of a Citizens Charter?
It is very important that the people feel engaged in this process.
I know that the Convention itself will do much in this area but it does not have the resources that the Commission has.
Will the Commission look at using its information budget to ensure people are engaged in this debate?
