If we have been having a different debate here in this Chamber today then that only goes to show how important this is.
The European Union must also have the power to act in the event of a government electing to impose a total blockade.
This is an important sign that majority voting is a crucial pre-requisite to the European Union' s being able to function come what may.
This is particularly important where enlargement is concerned, and legislation and in relation to treaties, which entail changes being made to legislation.
Of course we also want to extend the European Parliament' s corresponding powers in this area.
In addition, we as a European Parliament are going to have to take action in relation to Economic and Monetary Union, for there is a lack of supervision in this area.
The Finance Ministers behave as if they were in an intergovernmental meeting, when in the Ecofin Council and in the Euro 11 Council, which is an unacceptable way to go on.
Unlike Mrs Kaufmann, I am not in favour of extending supervision over the European Central Bank as I am an advocate of independence for the European Central Bank.
However, there must be an appropriate level of supervision on the political side.
Furthermore, the tripartite relationship of Commission, Council and Parliament must be restored to the sphere of foreign and security policy, where hitherto the Council was in sole charge far more than should have been the case, especially in relation to the crudely fashioned crisis management measures, for which the Commission alone has responsibility.
The overall plan failed to do justice to any of this.
We must examine whether any changes are needed to this end which would fall within the scope of the Intergovernmental Conference.
The Portuguese Presidency has agreed to initiate deliberations on this matter, perhaps to extend the mandate.
There is another point I would just like to draw your attention to.
The debates we are having these days, on a certain European country' s government, for example, show, do they not, that we must place the spiritual, moral, constitutional, community and common welfare-orientated leanings of the European Union on a firm footing, and that legally binding fundamental rights must also be incorporated into the Treaty for the same reason, as this will be a crucial stabilising factor.
I would urge those who are still very hesitant in this respect to consider whether now is not the time to make this connection and perhaps pluck up the courage we need to make suitable progress in matters of fundamental rights.
The European Union needs few, if any, new instruments, and it does not need any new competences.
What it does need are instruments that will enable it to put its competences into practice.
For this reason, we must ensure that the instruments have the effect of enabling us to carry out, on behalf of the citizens, the tasks we have already formally been set in the Treaty.
In my view, that is the most important issue this Intergovernmental Conference has to concentrate its energies on.
If we succeed in making progress here, then we will also be ready for the historic task of enlarging the European Union.
This is the crux of the matter.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I am confident that this will be tackled in a suitably positive manner under your tutelage.
, chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs. (IT) Mr President-in-Office, on listening to the various interventions, you have understood that in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and also among the leaders of Parliament' s political groups, the decision prevailed - although not without some disagreement - to put our faith in the Portuguese Presidency, instead of creating more difficulties by postponing the start of the Intergovernmental Conference.
I can assure you that it was not easy to achieve this, last week in the Committee I chair, but we eventually decided to back the Portuguese Presidency and we would like to win this wager.
You spoke to us about the start of your tour around the various capital cities and told us about the difficulties that some governments have in reaching a consensus in their own countries, and therefore in their parliaments.
I would like you to bear in mind that yesterday we had a very worthwhile day of discussions and dialogue with the representatives of the 15 national parliaments, which were represented by competent and exacting delegations.
The aim was not to draw conclusions - it was impossible to draw any - but the debate was certainly very encouraging.
We need to be careful and be sure that national governments try to convince their respective parliaments to ratify solutions that correspond to the Union' s requirements for growth and that they do not hide behind supposed resistance put up by the parliaments to avoid signing appropriate conclusions at the Intergovernmental Conference table.
However, we shall intensify our collaboration and our dialogue with the national parliaments for the entire duration of the Intergovernmental Conference.
Yesterday, we also discussed the Commission, represented by Commissioner Barnier, who gave its opinion.
This effort was appreciated, even if different views were later expressed as regards the proposals, and moreover, Mr President-in-Office, you also expressed different views.
Nevertheless, we must stress that many people are aware, as they were yesterday too, of the risk that enlargement could compromise the original plan for the construction of a political Europe, a risk that was, moreover, indicated in an interview that surely escaped no one' s attention, owing to the authority of the person being interviewed - Jacques Delors.
We must, therefore, ensure that at the Intergovernmental Conference we discuss how to consolidate the democratic bases of the Union and how to strengthen - and this has been discussed in the House even today, with regard to the situation in Austria - the system of principles, values and rights underpinning the Union and the role of the political institutions of the Union, with regard, among other things, to running the economy.
We are counting on the Portuguese Presidency, we are counting on ourselves and we are counting on the Commission so that we can hold constructive and decisive debates on all of this at the Intergovernmental Conference.
Mr President, only a strengthened Europe can cope with enlargement.
Only a strengthened Europe is immune to political opportunists who exploit dissatisfaction.
That is why sweeping reforms are necessary and, hence, a widened IGC agenda.
The Finnish Presidency only listened to minimalist governments and, unfortunately, turned a deaf ear to this Parliament.
Portugal should not take a leaf out its predecessor' s book.
It is of the utmost importance that the European Parliament and the Commission join forces for this IGC.
In many ways, they share the same interests and the same insights.
An essential component of this joint effort should, in any case, be this Parliament' s right of assent to the forthcoming changes to the Treaty.
Of all priorities, this one is the most pressing.
What is the Commission' s verdict on this?
It also means that our Parliament President and the two representatives should be able to take part on an equal political footing and, therefore, not only within the working party, but also at the same political level as the Commission.
There is no reason whatsoever why representatives directly elected by citizens should be involved in talks at a lower level than the Commission.
Not only do we owe the sweeping reforms to the new Member States, but we owe them to ourselves.
If we allow Europe to be watered down as a result of enlargement, we will drown in our own political quagmire.
Mr President, there are days when I really cannot understand this Parliament. It seems to take a masochistic pleasure in self-mutilation.
After having restricted, on its own initiative, its participation in the IGC to two minor seats, Parliament is now giving up the right to add to the agenda for this IGC.
The fact is, whether through weakness or foolishness - nothing to be proud of either way, you will admit - in rushing to give its opinion, Parliament is giving up the only lever which the Treaty accords it, i.e. demanding a complete IGC agenda as a prerequisite before declaring its opinion.
Why do we have to vote on this opinion tomorrow, 3 February, as a matter of urgency, when we could wait, in a position of strength, until the opening of the Strasbourg part-session on 14 February, and thus force an agenda that is complete, and therefore consistent, on the Council.
A good dose of hypocrisy is needed to overlook our weakness today.
Hypocrisy to be regretted bitterly, in our resolution, that the agenda for the IGC is not equal to the issues, since in our haste, with blameworthy naivety, we are stopping ourselves forcing through this more ambitious agenda.
If there is a democratic deficit at the end of this IGC, then I say that the political groups which so wanted this haste will be accountable for this.
Whether we want it or not, since Parliament itself is going to extinguish the only spotlight capable of shedding a little light on the debates, the venue for decisions is now going to move to the 15 Member States of the Union.
I therefore invite the Members of Parliament who form the great majority, those who last November ruled that the future of Europe was deserving of debates that went far wider than the Amsterdam leftovers, to take up their pilgrims' staffs and go and convince their own governments that this IGC must be extended, since this is permitted according to the resolution of the Helsinki Council.
Because of the situation in Austria, this is a dark day for Europe.
It makes us realise that the victory of democracy is never definitive, and that we have to work to convince and keep on convincing.
In order to assert our fundamental values, they need to be laid down in writing, as a matter of urgency, and, beyond this IGC, I believe we owe Europe a constitution.
Mr President, the draft resolution we are now discussing requires, precisely as before, that the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference should have a broad agenda involving radical reforms of the institutions.
The forthcoming enlargement of the Union is used as an argument for this.
I am convinced that this is an error of judgement.
A federal and centralist EU which intervenes more and more in the government of the Member States is in actual fact less well placed for enlargement.
A flexible EU which concentrates on fewer but important areas and which respects national differences and national democracy has a better chance of embracing a significantly greater number of countries.
Paragraph D of the draft resolution requires a more coordinated and more open economic policy at EU level.
It is not, however, possible to talk about this without at the same time talking about monetary union.
This text says nothing about the major democratic and political problems involving monetary union and the European Central Bank. This is untenable.
If there is a desire to make the EU more democratic, the whole construction of EMU must be reconsidered.
The Central Bank must be placed under political control so that the direction to be taken by monetary policy may be governed by political objectives such as high employment and prosperity. Public control of the Central Bank must be improved if this is to become possible.
The rigid and unsuccessful monetarism of the Stability Pact must be re-examined and discarded so that we might have a uniform policy which has prosperity as its primary objective.
Article 56 of the Treaty, prohibiting currency speculation or any interference in the free movement of capital, must be removed so that damaging currency speculation may be checked by means of political control.
In the majority of EU countries, there are now governments dominated by social democrats.
It is remarkable that, now they have the opportunity to do so, none of them is demanding any change in the direction taken by monetary union.
It also, of course, damages credibility when it is stated that monetary union could constitute a counterbalance to globalised capital.
The resolution requires the European Parliament to have increased influence over the Intergovernmental Conference.
It is, however, important to emphasise that the Intergovernmental Conference is and will remain a conference of the Member States.
It is the Member States' parliaments, or people voting in referenda, who are to direct the development of the Treaty.
It is therefore out of the question that the European Parliament should be given any formal influence over the negotiation process or over ratification.
Mr President, the Committee on Constitutional Affairs has proposed an essentially positive text, which I shall vote for, even if I personally had proposed a lot of amendments to broaden it.
Nevertheless, the events of the last few days show that all those who had made basic criticisms of the way enlargement and the revision of the Treaties have been planned were right.
The Union cannot be enlarged to 28 without addressing the matter of whether Europe has certain joint principles and values, whether it comes down to an economic free trade area, or whether, on the other hand, it has a greater ambition: the desire to be a supranational union, in ways that have yet to be defined, that wants to blaze a trail for civilisation and democracy in the world.
This is what is and was meant by the call for a European Constitution.
The amendment of the Treaties was, however, limited to a review of some internal rules, which was necessary and important, but did not answer the fundamental question: what is Europe, what are its common principles and therefore, its objectives and limitations?
However, politics exacts its revenge, and having been thrown out of the window by a debate on a limited agenda, it comes back in, as a matter of fact, through a door, and through the front door in the case of Austria, since a party is entering the Austrian Government which seems to represent a return to intolerance, xenophobia and forms of racism.
And it is not a question of links with the past; it is a question of prospects for the future, and nothing could be more wrong than the right and left taking a divided stand on this.
I belong to a world, the world of Liberal Catholics, which is not left-wing but which holds as dear as anyone else the values of tolerance and common European values, and will have nothing to do with policies that reject these values.
The Council has done well to lay open this subject to Europe and to the world and if we do not set down these values in a Charter of Fundamental Rights, in a European Constitution, then we shall construct a Europe without a solid, lasting base.
Commissioner Barnier, I know - at least I think I know - that you and the representatives of the Portuguese Presidency share these values: make the most of the chances you were given by the December Conference to include these subjects and principles, because this is the only way we will build a lasting Europe.
Mr President, I am in the happy position of being able to refer to a couple of striking contributions from a small group of Nordic sceptics and opponents of the drastic and growing integration process which, looked long and hard at, threatens the whole of democratic Europe.
I am thinking of the contributions from Mr Bonde and Mr Sjöstedt who point out that the present contribution contains a string of relatively unconscious but undoubtedly rational initiatives dictated by the desire for power and pointing in the direction of a centralist and federalist EU.
They rightly included the problem with monetary union and centralist government and presented a number of alternative democratic principles.
I might add that all rational political campaigning in my own country, Denmark, takes it for granted that, when we enlarge the circle of EU countries to include the envisaged huge number of new Member States and when we in that way extend the breadth of the Union, we cannot at the same time pursue further integration in depth, that is to say engage in a more intensive qualitative integration towards a United States of Europe.
However, that is precisely what is happening.
With every single geographical extension to the area covered by the EU, we have seen how extensions in breadth have been followed by intensive extensions in depth, and that is precisely what the draft resolution from the Committee is contemplating, especially in paragraph 7 which says that there should be more thorough integration in depth.
In the light of developments in recent days, it might well be asked what we really are to do about these intergovernmental conferences and treaty amendments when government leaders - in reality the European Council of Ministers - make decisions in relation to an independent Member State entailing intervention in that Member State' s democratic process.
You can think what you like about Mr Haider, and I personally consider him to be a very dangerous politician, but you cannot just intervene in an independent and friendly country' s democratic process.
When we hold intergovernmental conferences and consider changes to the Treaty, we must take into account the fact that the EU is developing all the time, sometimes in contravention of the Treaty, as we have just seen.
I welcome Commissioner Barnier and the Portuguese Presidency here this afternoon.
On 14 February, we will see the launch of the IGC which is to be completed by the end of 2000.
This is a big task but it can be done.
I think it is generally agreed here this afternoon across all groups that the Helsinki agenda will not be sufficient to cover the necessary reform to prepare Europe for enlargement.
In other words we need to go further than what has been referred to as the important "Amsterdam leftovers" .
These include the extension of qualified voting - in my country we accept that but not to areas of taxation - the re-weighting of voting in Council to favour larger states and the number of Commissioners in an enlarged Europe.
In relation to the latter point, Ireland wants to maintain the right to nominate a full and equal Member of the Commission irrespective of the number of Member States joining.
We are prepared to consider re-weighting the votes in the Council of Ministers, provided that the larger Member States are willing to agree to every Member State having a full and equal Member of the Commission.
I feel I speak for many smaller countries when I make that particular point.
At the IGC, we would also need a debate on the possible divisions of the Treaties into two - into a policy area and an area on the Constitution.
We would accept the division of the Treaties providing it would not limit the control the smaller Member States had in the re-negotiation of the whole policy area of the Treaty.
In other words, if we are not represented fully in the Commission we will not have an input into policy discussions.
So we are watching that entire point extremely carefully.
We look forward to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and to seeing its contents.
The Treaty of Amsterdam, Mr President, has set the number of European Parliament Members at 700 and a debate is needed in this Parliament on how that number will be distributed among the enlarged Europe.
Mr President, I warmly recommend a vote in favour of the Dimitrakopoulos/Leinen resolution, which clearly expresses both our disappointment at the inadequacy of the agenda and our wish that the Intergovernmental Conference should take place as soon as possible.
In any case, this emerges from the favourable schedule we decided upon.
I think that, under the present rules of the Treaties, the European Parliament would have little to gain from a policy of confrontation.
On the contrary, we should concentrate on working out persuasive proposals on the necessary reforms, in collaboration with the Commission whose own proposals are worthy of note.
We must use dialogue at every political level, including of course dialogue with the national parliaments.
That way, we will create a climate of cooperation which will be positive for the quality of the reforms.
Parliament' s representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference must make it clear to those with whom they will be negotiating that, with the Union' s institutional changes, we are faced with responsibility for the constitutional development of the Union.
They must therefore realise that such issues cannot be decided on the rationale of bargaining alone.
The issues to be dealt with at this Intergovernmental Conference are exceptionally sensitive.
It may be easy to come up with solutions, but what matters is how well those solutions will stand up in the long term.
I will mention two point that may create tension.
One is the balance which has so far been maintained between large and small countries.
Europe is not, nor can it become a classic federal state.
The solutions we opt for must be consistent with the fundamental rationale of the European Union, which is a union of states and peoples.
The other area of conflict is more difficult.
Owing to the imminent increase in membership, the bodies of the future European Union must become more effective.
This means that they must function more simply and more rapidly.
By its very nature, however, the European Union is, and will remain, a complex and convoluted multi-governmental institution.
Possibilities for faster and more simple operation do exist.
Of course they do, but they are not unlimited.
If the limits are exceeded because of a one-sided quest for effectiveness, then the legitimising basis of the European Union will suffer.
I am, however, optimistic.
Mr President, the Intergovernmental Conference mandate needs to be widened.
The most important issue with regard to this is internal differentiation within the Union.
It is unfortunate that there has been no serious consideration thus far here in Parliament of the issue of internal differentiation within the Union, which will, however, be necessary if the Union is to enlarge as planned.
The Commission' s former president, Jacques Delors, has once again publicly raised the issue of a European Confederation.
He has also said that the countries in the vanguard of integration should be able to proceed faster and that they should have their own institutions, for the sake of clarity.
The Commission' s current President, Mr Prodi, and the High Representative, Mr Solana, have put forward ideas along the same lines.
Last November, the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party adopted a position on internal differentiation within the Union when it proposed a system of concentric rings for Europe: the onion skin model.
In the next resolution on the IGC, Parliament must take a long and hard look at the questions of differentiation and flexibility.
Both enlargement and the achievements of integration will come under threat unless we can create a system of concentric rings, as proposed by the Group of the European Liberal Democrats and Reform Party.
My colleagues, Mrs Frassoni and Mr Onesta have already spoken, somewhat sceptically, about some aspects of the matter in hand.
I wish to add a voice of concern on the topic of subsidiarity, not just between Union and Member States but between Member States and their own internally self-governing regions.
This has been given inadequate attention and there are many things to be concerned about.
May I particularly draw attention to one of the implications of enlargement in respect of this Parliament.
A ceiling of 700 has been prescribed as the maximum that Parliament can safely become and remain a deliberative assembly.
