And yet we still have these problems in Wales and in Scotland.
Could the Commission look at this particular situation in relation to the agreement that was signed with the UK Government?
I take this to mean that the debate of which I was aware in Scotland is also occurring in Wales.
I will verify this point and, if you wish, I will give you a written answer at the same time as the one I have promised to Mr MacCormick.
Question No 47 by (H-0088/00):
Subject: Amount which Andalusia will receive from the Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period According to the Commission' s estimates and on the basis of the criteria established at the Berlin Summit (which include per capita GDP, the unemployment rate and the population census updated in accordance with the 1996 register of inhabitants), what amount is to be allocated to Andalusia from the Structural Funds for the 2000-2006 period?
Questions to Mr Bolkestein
Mr President, I will try to be brief in answering the Member' s question. The regional development plan submitted by the Spanish authorities on 29 October does not indicate how the Community funds will be allocated among the Spanish Objective 1 regions and therefore what your region of Andalusia will receive.
As I did not fully understand the plan, I contacted the Minister for Economic and Financial Affairs, Mr Rato, in a letter of 14 December which I have here, to ask him for more information on the document submitted.
In the coming weeks, the Commission will start negotiations with the Spanish authorities with a view to drawing up the Community support framework for the new period of 2000-2006. During these meetings I can assure you that the Commission will obtain the clarifications required on the regional allocation.
Therefore, if you wish, as soon as I have this information by sector and region, I will personally send you the information on Andalusia.
Mr Commissioner, the problem is that when Mr Aznar comes to the European Union to receive money for all the people of Andalusia, he counts all of them, but when he goes to the Andalusia Council to pay for services, he fails to notice 400 000 Andalusians, and this is very serious, because 400 000 children are the equivalent to the whole of Strasbourg or a city larger than Granada, full of children.
This question is very important and I would like to know - since this is a kind of 'baby fraud' - whether the Commissioner will see to it that these funds are not taken away from the Andalusians, so that the funds which the European Union are going to pay to Andalusia, based on the census, will take into account these 400 000 children which Aznar does not count when it comes to providing them with schools and services.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I would ask all of you - and do not take this as a warning - to deal with strictly Community matters.
I know that these are very important issues in Spain and there are differing viewpoints.
I would point out to the Commissioner that Mr Aznar is the President of the Spanish Government.
You may answer the question.
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo, I hear that you have a strong voice. I hope it is loud enough to be heard in Madrid for I realise that what you have said was not strictly intended for me.
I have given you my answer.
I am keen that the Structural Funds, particularly those in Objective 1, are allocated where needed.
We have criteria which are applied and we know roughly what each of the regions of Europe should or could receive.
I can only say that I must discuss these matters with the national authorities and government of each country. I am not avoiding the issue but I must abide by the general Regulation.
It is the responsibility of these authorities and governments to allocate the funds as objectively and fairly as possible.
I need to know about this allocation, however, and this is why I said that I could not answer today.
As I did not have an answer, I wrote to the Minister for Economic and Financial Affairs on 14 December.
I am about to lose patience at not having received an answer from him but I will send you this when I get it.
I regret that the Commissioner has once again become involved in an imaginative and, in this case, passionate intervention.
I would like to remind all of you that Spain is about to hold elections, and in fact there are just 25 days left before the elections.
It should be of comfort to the Commissioner that these elections will take place in 25 days time, since after that he will probably not have to deal with this type of question again.
I do believe it is important to say that Andalusia is going to receive 50% more within the Community support framework and that Spain also holds the record for the use of the Structural Funds, which means that the distribution is based strictly on the implementing regulations and is decentralised by means of the regional development plans and different Community support frameworks.
Lastly I would like to ask the Commissioner a specific question: Do you consider it necessary to change the implementing regulations for the Structural Funds or do you consider the current distribution criteria to be acceptable?
This is a fascinating debate which I realise is not totally Community-related.
Having said this, we must accept that elections are always taking place in the countries of the European Union.
I am pleased that the Structural Funds are the subject of discussions in Greece and Spain.
We were talking a short while ago in this House about debates involving our citizens, about public debates.
The more we talk about Europe and what Europe is doing for daily life, even when we disagree, the better this will be, provided that we talk about this objectively.
I am not going to give an opinion on any amendment to the Structural Funds Regulation.
This Regulation was adopted just last year in Berlin and I will be applying it for the next seven years.
We will talk about this issue during the cohesion report which I regard as an important time for making an assessment with and before this House and for outlining future prospects. The time will come at the beginning of next year for any amendments to be highlighted.
For the time being, please let me apply the Regulation which has not yet been applied as it was only approved in Berlin.
This is all I can say today.
Thank you very much for your replies, Mr Barnier.
Questions Nos 48 to 50 will be replied to in writing.
Question No 51 by (H-0049/00):
Subject: New premises for the OHIM At present the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (OHIM) is still operating from the same temporary premises, even though its new building was opened in June 1999.
In view of this unusual situation, will the Commission say why the OHIM has not yet moved to its new premises?
The honourable Member asked a question on this topic in November 1999 and I would like to refer him to the answer given at the time.
Furthermore, I have asked the president of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market, that is to say the Office in Alicante, to comment further on this new question and I can, as a result, inform the honourable Member as follows, on behalf of the Office:
The Office is not yet ready to move into the new building.
Unfortunately, a number of deadlines have been exceeded.
A number of technical provisions need to be made, such as the installation of a computer network, archives, a canteen and furniture.
The OHIM is now in the process of arranging this and is expecting to move into the new premises by June.
During the previous question, we were discussing electoral issues.
I believe that this issue is relevant to my question. Commissioner, you were not present at the extraordinarily named 'official opening' of the headquarters of the OHIM on 9 June, in the middle of an election campaign in Spain leading up to both the European elections and the local and regional elections.
If you had been there, I am sure you would have been ashamed.
The President of the Commission and some secretaries were present.
In the middle of an election campaign, a series of authorities, all of them run by the party in government, made clearly electioneering speeches which, furthermore, were broadcast live on television.
It was bizarre to see the President of the Region of Valencia praising the work of the Spanish Government, as well as his own work, although it was irrelevant to that event.
The opening of a building which was not finished, in the middle of an election campaign, which eight months after the opening can still not be occupied, makes the Spanish Government look ridiculous.
I am not worried that the Spanish Government should look foolish, because at the end of the day it was their responsibility, but it does worry me that the Commission should look foolish by endorsing, through its presence, this absurd event.
I would therefore like to ask you, Mr Commissioner: does it seem normal to you that an unfinished building should be opened during an election campaign?
Does it seem normal to you that the Commission should attend such an absurd event organised by the Spanish Government?
It does not fall within my remit to make statements about internal political situations within one Member State or another.
As such, I would prefer to withhold any comment on the situation which Mr Berenguer has just described.
I have to confess that I fail to comprehend why a certain opening ceremony was held in Spain.
What I can say is that I hope that this building will now be occupied as soon as possible.
May I also add that I hope to be in Alicante myself at the end of May to speak at a conference.
I hope that this building will then be occupied.
I would like to point out to the Commissioner that it is not an electoral question.
As members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, we have followed the creation of that institution and it is clear that it was established for electioneering reasons.
A year later, it is still not functioning, which means that the Commission spent money on a false opening.
We should ask ourselves to what extent this spending of funds was justified.
I would like to reiterate that the Commission is unconcerned with the underlying motivation of Member State actions.
It is, however, interested in official statements and actions.
We do not intend to go in the direction of what is termed in French un procÚs d'intention.
We are concerned with public official actions and events, rather than any possible underlying motivation.
This is why I find it also difficult to meet Mr Medina halfway and respond to his question.
Once again, the Commission does not speculate why something is happening earlier or later than planned. It only appreciates that a building for this Office is opened and occupied as soon as possible.
Also, the Commission does not engage itself in finding out whether certain expenditure was real or virtual.
As far as I am concerned, all expenditure is real.
And any remaining skeletons, I intend to leave them in the cupboard.
Question No 54 by (H-0117/00):
Subject: Alcohol monopoly and the internal market What action does the Commission intend to take in order to prevent the extension of the State alcohol monopoly apparently being planned by Sweden, and the associated import restrictions, and to ensure that the rules of the single market are applied?
I would like to answer these two questions as follows.
When Sweden joined the European Union, it was allowed to retain quantitative restrictions on alcoholic beverages which travellers can bring into the country from other Member States.
This derogation from the principle of the free movement of goods lapses on 30 June of this year.
Sweden now wants to extend this measure by another five years, as this would be necessary to protect public health.
My position on this is clear.
Sweden has now had sufficient time - since its accession to the Union - to adapt its policies to a situation where such import restrictions do not exist.
I cannot see a reason, therefore, why a further extension for this measure should be proposed.
European citizens have the right to buy goods for their own use, including taxes, in any Member Sate and to take them to another Member Sate without having to subject these goods to controls and without possibly having to pay another set of taxes on them.
That is a basic principle governing the internal market and derogations from this principle must be exceptions and must be limited in time.
We want to guarantee that Swedish citizens too can enjoy the benefits of the internal market, just like other citizens of the European Union.
This certainly does not mean that I do not share the concern in Sweden surrounding the possible health problems which can be caused by alcohol abuse.
A recent study, carried out by Professor Lindgren of the University of Lund, however, has shown that abolishing the restrictions would not lead to a higher alcohol consumption in Sweden.
I have already had a chance to discuss my position with Mr Ringholm, the Swedish Finance Minister on two occasions.
I also discussed this matter with the Swedish parliamentary Finance committee last week.
It is now up to the Swedish government to take the necessary measures.
Thank you for your reply.
I should just like to apologise for the error in my question to the Commission. Instead of 2004, it should, of course, be 1 July 2000.
I have some sympathy with the Commission's standpoint that derogations should only be granted occasionally.
Such a rule is only normal.
Nevertheless, I should like to ask two questions: Are you thinking of embarking upon continued discussions with the Swedish Government about extending the derogations, for example for as long as Denmark and Finland have derogations?
My second question concerns the whole policy on alcohol.
This may, of course, be seen as an issue concerning the internal market, but also as a public health matter for the whole EU.
What are the respective roles of alcohol policy and public health considerations in the Commission's work?
A Europe-wide policy on alcohol is not just an issue concerning the internal market. It also has important implications for public health.
If we had considered these aspects in their overall context, then it might have been easier to carry on a dialogue with Sweden.
May I thank Mr Andersson for the supplement to his first question and may I answer that question as follows?
Firstly, Finland and Denmark are subject to exemptions to the basic rule of the free movement of goods until 2003.
These countries are in the process of taking measures in preparation of free access of alcoholic products in the year 2003.
However, in the case of Sweden, the situation is different.
In 1995, a five-year derogation period was decided upon, which is now lapsing.
I have as yet not heard any arguments on the basis of which the Commission would need to extend this period.
Secondly, the Swedish Government is being consulted all the way.
I can inform Mr Andersson that I will leave for Stockholm on Monday, 6 March, in order to talk to Minister Ringholm, to members of the Swedish parliament, and, if necessary, also to the Prime Minister or other ministers, in order to continue discussions on this matter. I am fully aware that emotions are running high in the political arena in Sweden regarding this issue.
Thirdly, I understand very well that the health aspect of this matter is naturally important.
I would repeat at this juncture what Professor Lindgren of Lund University has stated, namely that whatever happens in terms of import restrictions, the consumption of alcohol will remain the same.
The question is then, of course, where does the volume of alcohol originate from which is not imported by travellers?
The answer is that this is smuggled into the country or made by the Swedes themselves, and as Mr Andersson knows, this is an extremely dangerous and unhealthy activity.
Well now, Mr Andersson seems to think that the health situation will improve if we restrict the import of alcohol.
But in that case, not only Sweden, but all EU countries, should then be subject to a total ban on alcohol.
We can cast our minds back to a similar situation in the United States.
Mr Andersson will be familiar with what was termed then 'prohibition' .
He will also be aware of the effects the ban had on Mafia activity within the United States, where, eventually, prohibition was withdrawn.
All this means that we need to protect health, of course, but not by banning alcohol, because that does not work.
Mr President, the question at issue is the income from the Swedish alcohol monopoly and when the Swedish Government says that it must cover health costs, then this is proof of a distortion of competition because other countries must cover their health costs themselves, with no alcohol monopoly at their disposal.
My question refers to whether you too know of studies which state that a moderate intake of good quality alcohol such as Franconian wine or Bavarian beer is good for you and would therefore also be good for the Swedish budget.
I gather that Mr Posselt has hinted at the fiscal aspects of this matter.
I also happen to know that the high tax on alcohol products in Sweden goes back to the year 1638 and that since then, the sale of alcohol products has accounted for a significant portion of the state' s tax revenue.
As is known, this has led to a state monopoly in Sweden which, in itself, is at odds with Union legislation.
As to the healing effect of alcohol - to which, I believe, Mr Posselt also made reference - I could not agree more with him: I think that a good bottle of wine can be extremely good for your health and is also socially extremely pleasant, and perhaps Mr Posselt, Mr Andersson and myself could meet in the bar of this Parliament one of these days to share an aquavit.
Mr President, I listened with interest to the Commissioner's reply about the need to apply the laws of the single market.
I wonder whether he can say whether he considers his reply to be compatible with the failure by the Commission to take the French Government to the European Court of Justice on the application of France's Loi et Vin, which effectively prevents single market rules applying to the sale of alcohol products in France?
Can we now expect the European Commission to take action against the French Republic before the European Court of Justice?
I should like to reply very briefly to the question raised by the honourable Member, since this matter is now under active consideration by the Commission.
The Commission has to take a decision on whether the matter is closed or whether it should refer it to the European Court of Justice.
My reply is perhaps not satisfactory right now, but I would like to assure the honourable Member that the Commission will take that decision within a matter of weeks.
I ask for the Member's understanding for this small delay in the Commission's decision.
Commissioner, do you have any reason, on public health grounds, for a difference in the taxation rates on, for example, Scotch whisky or French Bordeaux wine or even my colleague's Bavarian beer?
Can you envisage applying an alcohol - equivalent basis for taxation in Europe?
The matter of excise taxes, to which the honourable Member is referring, is the prerogative of the Member State concerned.
The Commission has no instruments to enforce any particular decrease or increase in excise taxes on alcoholic products or on any other products.
Towards the end of this year the Commission will submit a report on the differences in excise taxes between Member States.
It will no doubt engage in a discussion both with Parliament and the Council on this state of affairs, which indicates that there are quite a lot of differences in excise rates between Member States.
For example - I believe the honourable Member referred to this - no excise taxes are applied on wine in France, whereas they are applied in the United Kingdom.
That leads to a distortion of the internal market because wine is smuggled from France to the United Kingdom.
The question specifically refers to the relation between excise taxes and the alcohol content of the goods subject to excise tax.
The Commission has no means of influence here.
In the case of Sweden, the instrument of excise taxes is indeed used to reduce the consumption of alcohol.
