We have a quite exciting debate in front of us.
A conference where the issues are properly debated will make it possible to straighten out misunderstandings, at the same time as perhaps improving upon certain points.
Parliament and the Commission can together increase their efforts to achieve an effective competition policy and so create new opportunities and new resources for our citizens.
In fact, in my own constituency of Stockholm, we have many good local examples of increased supply and improved quality which have arisen precisely because of exposure to competition in areas which were previously total monopolies.
We would encourage a continuation of the open debate which has been strengthened in the course of consideration of the reports by Mr von Wogau and Mr Rapkay.
We hope that the legal points of view will also be accorded the importance which is only reasonable in a state based on the rule of law.
Mr President, as a new Member I am pleased to be able to make my maiden speech here today, even though there has been a delay.
I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteurs Mr von Wogau, Mr Langen, Mr Rapkay and Mr Jonckheer, as well as the Commission, for their excellent cooperation.
Competition is certainly fundamental to the social market economy and European competition policy is a success story; take the energy and telecommunications sectors, where there has been a demonstrable lowering of prices and improvement in quality of service.
All this is to the good of the consumer.
But we have now arrived at a point where we need to develop competition policy further.
The Commission has put forward a new White Paper on this containing two key points: dropping the obligation to notify and retrodisplacement of law enforcement.
Dropping the obligation to notify will mean less red tape and administration costs, at any rate.
At the same time, this change of system will also lead to more onus being placed on the individual in the business world, of course.
It will no longer simply be a case of submitting papers and having them approved; for one thing, each person will have to take responsibility themselves, and that is probably why there is unease about this in other quarters.
However I believe that we should use this opportunity for Europe to set down a marker for less red tape.
The second point relates to the retrodisplacement of law enforcement.
If we are to create a culture of law in Europe, then there is no doubt that the law must be applied not only by the Commission, by central bodies, but also by national authorities, by national courts.
We are not discussing the fact that although every EU law is only ever decided on centrally, it is precisely the adaptation phase where we will experience a lack of legal certainty.
It will certainly be necessary to develop an instrument for this in the anticipated legislative procedure that will enable enterprises to enjoy legal certainty and to have recourse to the Commission in this matter.
The way to a European monopolies commission must be kept clear, something that will certainly form a subject for future discussion.
But we need there to be more transparency in the competition policy.
Parliament must have more involvement and I also believe that if we were to introduce a register in which we could ascertain what state aid is being granted, then this would encourage the Member States to be more disciplined.
However, when it comes to what the future holds for competition, there are two issues dear to my heart.
One is subsidiarity.
We all hold the view that competition is vital to the economy and requires there to be efficiency, and I believe we should also permit competition in the regions.
Competition between the regions will certainly strengthen rather than weaken the European Union.
I would cite, by way of example, the issue of job creation schemes, savings banks and regional banks, and GÌtesiegel.
Here, a region has, by its own efforts, created a means of marketing its own products.
This own initiative must not be destroyed by European intervention.
I believe there is also a need to raise the de minimis regulation.
We should do everything within our power to force the regions into a situation where they have to compete with each other.
My second point relates to discussion about competition and the social market economy, although I am not going to talk about market failure just now.
I have already referred to the regional and savings bank sector, but I would just like to focus on a matter one hears again and again in certain quarters.
These days, someone who lives in an old people' s home is accommodated within the social field.
However, I could also regard them as a customer, and I believe we should enter into rather clear and timely discussion on the ways in which the social field, that is evolved structures, stifle competition.
Apart from that, I could refer to any customers, any sector, as customers, and thereby have a highly destructive effect on social fields.
To conclude, I would just like to say something on the principle of subsidiarity. I believe it to be of vital importance that where Member States allow regions and local authorities to raise taxes, they should continue to be able to do so and not be subject to across- the-board regulation by Europe.
Thank you very much, Mr Radwan.
I would like to congratulate you on what is referred to in German parliamentary-speak, inappropriately in your case, as a maiden speech.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am speaking on behalf of my fellow Member, Robert Goebbels, who is unable to attend due to a political commitment.
Within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, the Jonckheer report has given rise to bitter controversy on the subject of the operation of the market.
A slim right-wing majority succeeded in removing any reference to market failures.
Even if the majority in this House were to adhere to this ultraliberal idea of a supposedly perfect market, it would not make any difference to the real world.
Economic relationships in the real world adequately demonstrate that eliminating all public intervention in the market does not in any way bring about perfect competition and the optimum distribution of resources.
While, since the dawn of time, the market has been the key forum for human interchange, it has never been perfect.
The market favours the short term and immediate profits.
On the market, the balance of power between supply and demand are generally to the detriment of the weakest parties, consumers and workers.
In order to function, the market needs rules.
The necessary and valuable spirit of initiative must be offset by a sense of responsibility towards society.
We European Socialists are in favour of a market economy with a social purpose.
The market is not an end in itself; it must help to improve the human condition.
The European Union or individual States must not take over from economic operators, but public authorities must define the rules and objectives which enable the economy to develop in a sustainable fashion.
Finally, aid can enable restructuring, offer training, save jobs and thus know-how.
The main objective of the Union' s competition policy cannot be to reduce the overall level of aid.
This aid must be aligned with the objectives of the Union, particularly economic and social cohesion, sustainable development and research.
The Commission must track down the illegal aid and the aid which actually hinders the internal market.
It would be a serious mistake to eliminate all public aid.
The Internet is not a product of the market, but the result of research financed by the American army.
The World Wide Web, which has enabled the meteoric development of the information society, was developed by CERN in Geneva, once again with public aid.
The German Government' s intervention to save the Holzmann group was criticised as an unjustifiable constraint upon the market economy.
President Duisenberg even attempted to attribute the weakness, the entirely relative weakness of the euro in relation to the dollar to this state interventionism.
I did not hear Mr Duisenberg criticising the intervention of the American monetary authorities to save the hedge fund, LTCM.
Wishing to save 60 000 jobs is, apparently, a sin against the market, but saving capital does not seem to present any problem for the advocates of the free market.
Public monies are used in order to repair the damage caused by international speculation, as was the case in Mexico, Asia and Brazil.
Human labour, on the other hand, is considered to be a simple factor in the equation.
We Socialists reject the liberals' naïve optimism on this point.
We want a true culture of competition in Europe.
The state hand must still be clearly seen to regulate the market and the Commission must act as judge.
Mr President, Commissioner, I want to begin by thanking Mr Rapkay for a good report and constructive cooperation.
I want to thank you, Commissioner Monti, for your outstanding cooperation and I want to tell you that, as we enter the new millennium, you have an especially important role.
It is your job to tidy up the mess left by national governments. These may well have grand visions when it comes to competition policy, but their capacity to wreak havoc seems boundless.
Let me mention the latest examples we have seen: Holzmann, a company which receives considerable aid from the German Government; sawmills in former East Germany; and, especially, aid to shipyards.
These are three areas in which many Danish companies are experiencing major problems and are being squeezed out of their markets.
I want to say to Mr Poos that I very much agree with Mr Duisenberg that these examples show that some EU Member States are not in a position to restructure their economies and, to that extent, are helping to undermine the value of the euro.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party has tabled 80 amendments in the committee, all concerning state aid.
These are amendments which we believe will lead to transparency and openness, which is very important with a view to making the internal market work.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues on the committee for supporting the amendments tabled by the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party.
As I say, our amendments concern transparency, and I should like to emphasise the amendment which urges the Commission to propose uniform criteria and conditions for the type of state aids we consider to be lawful, specifically in order to ensure that companies can predict what their situation will be.
Another issue is that of what we are to do when state aid is declared unlawful.
How do we ensure that unlawful state aid is paid back?
At present, there are no common rules in this area, and we vigorously urge the Commission to make a point of harmonising the rules on repayment.
This is the way forward if we are to ensure uniform conditions of competition.
Finally, we propose keeping both a register, as mentioned by a number of my fellow MEPs, and also a scoreboard showing where the Member States at present stand with regard to state aid.
You have shown us the way, Mr Monti, with the single market scoreboard.
It was this which inspired us to propose the same thing with regard to state aid.
I very much hope that you, Commissioner Monti, will support these amendments, and I look forward to your comments and to finding out where you stand on this matter.
To conclude, I want to welcome the Commission' s XVIIIth Report on Competition Policy, on which, once again, a good deal of work has been done.
But, as I have already mentioned, our overriding objectives ought still to be those of transparency and openness.
There is still a need to tighten up in the areas mentioned, and there is therefore good reason for continuing to work resolutely towards solving the problems concerning the lack of transparency and openness in the area of state aid.
This is especially necessary in relation to the forthcoming enlargement of the Union, and I should like to thank Mr Jonckheer who, in his report, has considered very thoroughly the problems associated with enlargement and with ensuring that the applicant countries are able to meet our criteria, as well as with ensuring common conditions of competition.
As Liberals and Greens, we clearly have different opinions on how the world should look, but we are well on the way to agreement as to our objectives, and we shall try to find reasonable solutions to our problems.
Mr President, Commissioner, there are just two questions which must be answered.
Are state aid to business or inter-company agreements legitimate in a market economy, and who must supervise these exceptions to the absolute rules of the market economy?
Regarding the first point, we say quite clearly that, in order to take into consideration the requirements of sustainable development which the European Union has endorsed, it is essential that, in some instances, there is state aid to businesses, be it in the form of tax exemptions, special taxation or even direct aid.
It is also legitimate for there to be inter-company agreements and voluntary restraint agreements, since all these agreements make it possible to reduce the detrimental effects of competition on social or ecological requirements.
So our clear response is that, yes, such aid and such agreements are legitimate, but we say that every single one of these agreements must be expressly justified.
The von Wogau report proposes referring supervision of the legitimacy of individual cases to national level.
We feel this is relatively dangerous, but all the same we shall vote in favour of it because we recognise that the Commission cannot do everything.
We demand that the greatest possible transparency should be in place and that greater powers of investigation be granted to the Commission in order to check the legitimacy of such exceptions after the fact.
Mr President, once again we are debating the European Union' s competition policy.
But let us stop to consider the circumstances in which this debate is taking place and the conclusions to which it should bring us.
The overriding features of today' s economy are massive mergers and acquisitions involving huge companies with a market monopoly and the emergence of frighteningly powerful multinational groups.
Should we not be discussing this issue?
We need a competition policy which can and will introduce controls on the activities of these private-sector monopolies.
Certain sectors of European industry, such as the shipbuilding industry, air transport and the steel industry, which have been hard hit by existing competition policy, have suffered tremendously.
They have lost their status, and a significant slice of the world market and hundreds of thousands of workers have been made redundant.
When will we debate that?
The scandalous concentration of power in sectors of strategic importance is giving speculative multinational groups economies the size of entire states, and Member States of the Union at that.
And yet, we keep on weakening the public sector and we are ready and willing to tighten competition policy yet further by qualifying public procurement contracts placed with public-sector corporations as state aid.
At the same time, unemployment is spiralling as a result of the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs.
Workers are facing a massive attack on their employment and social rights.
Consumers see their standard of living being eroded, poverty spreading and the public sector and production base in most countries in the Union being dismantled and dissolved in the name of unadulterated and catastrophic competition, in the name of the absolute market economy and the promotion of the monopolistic interests of big business.
We consider the competition policy to be responsible for all this and are totally opposed to it.
Mr President, Commissioner, in the course of this pivotal year, prior to the changeover to the single currency, the Commission has deployed every effort to ensure the birth of the euro in a favourable environment.
The competition policy has, as far as these resources permitted, contributed to this event.
For our part, we remain staunchly opposed to the single currency which, far from bringing us the advantages and flexibility of a shared currency, imprisons us in an artificial straitjacket, which has been imposed on the peoples of Europe.
Having said that, governing means planning. It also means being responsible and, in this new context which has been forced upon us, competition law naturally has an essential role to play.
In this area, the Commission has given priority to a number of routes of action: acting on the structure of markets by actively combating anti-competitive practices, by refocusing its departments' supervisory activities only upon matters with a manifest Community interest and by affirming its intention to modernise competition law.
As regards state aid, it is essential to ensure that regulations are not made more complex, and the introduction of a public register, where all aid would be recorded, does not seem advisable to us since this onerous commitment would quite naturally run counter to the attempts to simplify bureaucratic constraints.
Finally, on the subject of modernising the implementation of Articles 85 and 86 of the Treaty, we do not think that decentralised application would necessarily be going in the right direction.
The Commission is, in fact, retaining not only the power to take matters out of the jurisdiction of national authorities, but clearly obliging the national jurisdictions to avoid disputing the decisions of the Commission at all.
National states would thus become the secular arm of the Commission regarding observance of the application of rules which they do not control.
In conclusion, I would say that while some measures are heading in the right direction, we shall of course remain vigilant in order to prevent the snowballing of Federalism which, if it were realised, would be to the detriment of Europe and the sovereignty of the states.
Mr President, Commissioner, we have a basically positive view of the Commission' s White Paper on competition, particularly as regards the abolition of the system of notification and authorisation, but we are also puzzled by several things.
First of all, there is a risk that the decentralisation of powers, though necessary in many ways, will cause an abnormal increase in competition-related initiatives, and that some people will be tempted to use competition law, not as a means to be resorted to when all else fails, of ensuring the smooth and predictable functioning of the markets, but for the purposes of as an instrument for economic and industrial policy, planning and interference with the natural workings of the markets themselves, or even for protectionist purposes.
In this respect, we should heed the words of von Eieck, and doubtless also those of the great Italian liberal Bruno Leoni, who warned precisely against the risks of an abnormal increase in anti-competition policies.
State interference in the economy is, even today, still to blame for the most serious hindrances placed in the way of the market, competition and freedom of choice for European users and consumers.
There is State aid for businesses - we have already discussed this, there is still a strong public presence in the economy - it is estimated that the Italian Treasury controls 15% of stock exchange capitalisation; governments and central banks place obstacles in the way of mergers and acquisitions; and there has been much talk in recent weeks about Vodafone' s bid for Mannesmann and the bailout of Holzmann.
Finally, Commissioner, we cannot forget that large sections of the economy are still firmly in the hands of the state, ranging from state television, which is funded on a mandatory basis by the taxpayer, and the Post Office, to some compulsory insurance schemes, including health and social welfare systems, which are managed by inefficient state monopolies which leave no-one but the wealthy user with any other option.
Commissioner, I am quite familiar with the constraints imposed by the Treaties, but I believe that, it must be emphasised once again that the European economy is finding it hard to compete with the American economy, especially because of insufficiently open markets and a lack of genuine competition.
What is being done may well be very important, but it is still not sufficient.
Mr President, a White Paper, by definition, is not something you can take or leave.
It is there to generate reactions and the White Paper has certainly succeeded in doing that.
It forms a sound basis for discussion and is to be welcomed in this sense.
I understand where the authors are coming from and I share their views.
I also assume that you, Commissioner, want to honour the reputation of, and the work put in by, your predecessors and that your offices will pursue the same objective.
I cannot imagine the Commission taking initiatives in order to de-Europeanise or re-nationalise in a thorough manner, but I have my concerns and questions nevertheless.
Firstly, these relate to the coherence of the policy' s application.
In general, I am a great defender of cultural diversity but not in terms of competitiveness within the internal market.
The internal market needs a uniform competition policy, not only in terms of concept, but also in terms of application.
It is true, there are some European regulations and interpretative statements on the way.
The Commission is also said to have the right of evocation and can give guidelines to the national competition authorities.
But I still wonder if we do not run the risk of ending up in a kind of Echternach procession where we will have to take one step back before we are able to take two steps forward.
So, I would like to hear more about how the Commission will guarantee this uniform application in practice and whether you yourself consider the courses outlined from point one hundred onwards in the White Paper to be feasible.
Secondly, I understand the worry of industry regarding legal certainty.
Many dossiers are currently being filed with precisely this concern.
This instrument will fall by the wayside in future.
In the White Paper, you state that the Commission will still issue particular orders which can be used as guidelines, but what will your criteria be for granting such orders one day but not the next?
Thirdly, I would like to know whether the Commission has looked into the effects its new approach will have on industrial strategy.
