Finally, this discharge report is naturally addressed to the Commission. But this does not detract from the fact that the European Parliament should also put its own house in order.
As long as we have no status, we are not credible as a force for reforming the Union. The reforms of the European institutions are necessary in order to be able to continue Europe' s development process.
We cannot have a decisive and fair Europe unless it is also open and democratic.
All institutions must now join forces in order to work together towards building this type of Europe.
Mr President, the Committee on Industry decided to go ahead and draw up a report on the discharge for 1997 although we were not specifically asked to do so.
We went ahead because we felt we should start this Parliament in the way in which we mean to go on, that is, by making sure that we take good care of taxpayers' money in Europe.
During the course of our work on this report it became clear that there are persistent problems in the spending areas under the control of our budget.
They were not unique to 1997 and two strands seem to run through them.
The first is a tendency for the Commission to embark on very ambitious programmes, particularly in third countries, without sufficient assessment of the practicalities of implementation and proper resourcing.
The second involves serious managerial shortcomings in the Commission, in particular in relation to coordination across departments and management of external contracts.
I know that all the Institutions bear some responsibility for the increasing workload of the Commission and for some of the lack of resources.
That cannot excuse everything that we came across.
Citizens of Europe expect the European institutions to be properly managed and they are right to do so.
That is why I want to echo the comments from my colleague about the importance of the reform process which has been promised to the people of Europe by Mr Prodi and Mr Kinnock.
From what I have seen of the reform process, it looks good.
I saw some of Mr Kinnock's papers today, I heard some of what he had to say.
I have every confidence that if we and the politicians of Europe support him we will see the kind of reform we need.
But we need that reform process.
Many of the general points raised in our committee's report have been covered in Mrs van der Laan's report.
It is an excellent report and we should all congratulate her on it.
It seems to hit on all the right points without just being like some of the old reports, a series of details.
It groups them together and that is very important.
There are two issues I would like to draw your attention to.
One is nuclear safety in Eastern Europe.
We have to get this right.
The Committee of Independent Experts said the Commission was not managing this properly.
We have to remedy that.
The second point is about scrutiny mechanisms.
We need from the Commission material we can use to help us scrutinise spending.
We need proper information, given in a proper way and we all have to take this whole process a lot more seriously than in the past.
It has been seen as a bureaucratic process to be done as quickly as possible in as little time as possible.
I hope colleagues in this House will support the grounds for discharge for 1997 and, at the same time, that the Commission will push ahead with the reform process which is long overdue.
Only in this way can we create a new culture in the Commission and at the same time get public confidence restored.
Mr President, I am sure the Commission will be relieved to hear that the 97 discharge is unlikely to have the same impact as the 96 discharge which, as you are all so very well aware, led to the forced resignation of the Santer Commission.
The Socialist Group will be voting to grant discharge.
I am sure you will be relieved to hear that as well.
But that is not to say that we are satisfied, and that everything in the garden is rosy.
It is clear that a radical overhaul of the Commission is long overdue.
It indicates, however, that we acknowledge that steps are being made in the right direction.
I just want to outline some of the issues that we, as Socialists, have put down as amendments.
We hope these will be carried because they are important in the way that they will impact on future reform.
First of all, the immunity of officials: this should be lifted if and when requested by a national prosecutor.
We need to make it much easier to prosecute officials who are guilty of fraud and corruption.
It is critical to note that the Commission has too often failed to act on the reforms recommended by the Court of Auditors.
The Court's report is there for a reason, our response to it is there for a reason and it is important that it is followed through.
I have just heard now that an audit progress board is going to be set up by the Commission.
Even if we hear nothing else, we know that is going in the right direction in terms of the reforms that we want to see.
Too often we have put forward recommendations and they have not been acted upon even though you have said very often that you will act on them.
We want to see that follow-through to a much greater extent in future.
The other issue is access to confidential documents.
We have had problems in the past in terms of our responsibility in carrying out discharge because we have not had access to the documents we should have had.
We understand that we also have a responsibility here, that if we are given documents we must ensure that confidential documents will indeed be kept confidential.
We have put down an amendment to that effect.
One issue which is referred to in the van der Laan report is the whole question of the Gaza hospital.
The situation there is totally unacceptable.
We will not put up with it for much longer and we are looking for immediate action on that issue.
I would like to congratulate Lousewies van der Laan.
I do not usually bother congratulating people but I think she has produced a very cogent report and deserves our thanks.
Mr President, Commissioner, if we are honest, we find ourselves in a somewhat unusual situation.
We are discussing last year' s discharge, but also the Commission' s responsibility.
I would like to raise the problems which are still piled up high on our desks.
The assessment of whether or not the discharge will be granted also depends to some extent on where the emphasis is placed.
It is about a Commission which is no more.
There is now a new Commission.
Then it is logical to grant discharge, because how can the current Commissioner be blamed where 1997 is concerned?
The problems remain and this gives rise to doubts.
We have to take a decision now regarding the Commission' s good intentions, but there is still no structural outline for these good intentions.
Mr Kinnock will present his proposal next month.
We are all very much anticipating this, but the facts are still missing at this time when we already have to decide whether or not to grant discharge.
It is clearly a dilemma with which the rapporteur has also struggled.
This dilemma stretches beyond the areas which I have already listed.
Take, for example, the pledges made by the Commission. They look good in themselves.
I have read a few documents written by Mr Kinnock and we have every confidence in them.
But I will give two examples from which it is not as evident that the good intentions which the Commission has now expressed will lead to a good outcome: the public nature and confidentiality of documents.
The previous speaker already said something about this.
A document is circulating at the moment - not at a low level, but at a high level within the Commission - which, instead of enhancing the public nature of documents, is having the opposite effect.
This is an illustration of empty pledges not necessarily leading to good results.
This also applies to whistle-blowers.
Mr Kinnock has also devoted some fine-sounding phrases to this subject but, at the same time, it is entirely unclear, at this moment when we have to make a decision, what, for example, happens with whistle-blowers who want to get something off their chest and cannot do this internally but who want to address the outside world - the press or Parliament.
We have still not had a response to crucial questions of this type.
So there is doubt as to whether these pledges of the Commission contain enough substance at this crucial time when decisions need to be made.
This also applies, for example, to the very real projects which the Committee on Industry has introduced.
In my opinion, the Commission and Mr Kinnock should come with good intentions and with sound plans on personnel policy and financial management, but each Commissioner who is now responsible for an area which has had serious shortcomings in the past should come with sound plans in order to improve the situation and not with general, empty proposals.
At the moment, our group still feels sympathy for, and patience with, the Commission because it cannot be held responsible for a large proportion of the mistakes made in the past, but this patience has a limit.
Clear progress must be visible.
At present, we trust that the Commission will produce these sound proposals, but it is not a foregone conclusion that it will do so.
Finally, Mr President, the 1996 discharge was the beginning of the end of the last Commission.
I express the hope that - in fact, I urge the present Commission to ensure that - the 1997 discharge is the beginning of a true reform of financial policy by the Commission. Otherwise this discharge will not have been of any value.
In assessing the question of whether or not to grant the Commission discharge, the decision must be based upon what actually occurred during the financial year concerned, in this case in the course of 1997.
In our Group, we find it hard to see how the financial administration for 1997 was in any crucial way better than that for 1996.
In that year, we voted against granting discharge.
As a result, we shall vote against granting discharge for 1997, too.
We think that this picture of ours is confirmed by the examination carried out by the Court of Auditors.
It is both good and necessary that reforms have been promised.
So far, the promises which have been made are still, however, to be fulfilled, especially where transparency is concerned.
We are therefore going to vote in favour of the demands for reforms which are presented in the resolution, but against the granting of discharge.
Mr President, first of all, I have only positive comments to make on Mrs Van der Laan' s very expert work on this report.
The Union for a Europe of Nations Group cannot vote for approving the accounts for 1997.
The report on so-called discharge contains a comprehensive and extremely critical survey of the accounts.
We support these critical remarks, and I must therefore state that it would seem quite absurd, against this background, to vote in favour of approving the accounts.
It has not been possible for the Court of Auditors to issue an auditor' s statement to the effect that the arrangements covered by the accounts are lawful, and we should regard it as extremely problematic if we, as Members of this Parliament, were to vote in favour of accounts without having any guarantee of the legality of the arrangements concerned.
The majority have made their approval of the accounts conditional upon the new Commission' s implementing a series of reforms, so as to ensure that what we are familiar with from the previous Commission' s period of office is not repeated.
Again, I must say that we are concerned here with an extremely unfortunate confusion of the old Commission' s accountability for 1997 and the new Commission' s accountability for the future.
We do not think that the new Commission, under any circumstances, could incur liability for the past.
We think it is wrong to talk about the Commission' s liability as an institution.
The mistakes up until 1999 are attributable to those who had responsibility at that time, and we still have no way of knowing whether the new Commission can do any better.
By means of this extraordinary procedure, Parliament is stopping itself from placing liability for the arrangements in 1997 squarely where it belongs, namely with the previous Commission.
It was the 1996 accounts which led to the downfall of the previous Commission, and the 1997 accounts are just as incriminating.
There is no reason why, against this background, we should agree to grant discharge.
As far as the decision to balance the accounts is concerned, we shall abstain from voting, and where, finally, the motion for a resolution is concerned, we shall attach most importance to the many correct instructions contained in this and vote in favour of it.
Mr President, the decision relating to discharge for the 1997 financial year was postponed because the erstwhile Commission, to whom it was to be granted, had stepped down before the appointed time and was only continuing in office in a caretaker capacity.
Mrs van der Laan' s report - on which she has lavished a great deal of hard work, and for which we are indebted to her - proposes that we should grant discharge to the Commission for 1997.
One might ask how it is that the current Commission is to receive the discharge for its predecessor' s budgetary management - Mr Camre just mentioned this - particularly as the discharge for the previous year, 1996, was denied.
That is just the way things are, however.
In taking over the mandate, the new Commission has to assume responsibility not just for the achievements of the past but also for the mistakes made.
Since, on account of the college system, discharge can only be granted to the Commission as a whole or, alternatively, denied or postponed, it is no longer of any consequence that four former Commissioners who belonged to the previous Commission that has yet to be discharged, crop up again as Members of this body.
This question ought to have been asked when the new Commission was appointed.
If Parliament votes in favour of the Committee on Budgetary Control' s proposal this week and grants discharge, then the Commission must not take this to be a blank cheque.
For it is the third section of Mrs van der Laan' s report that is the most important, to my mind, namely the motion for a resolution.
The comments contained within, under eight headings, are an integral part of the discharge, the implementation of which forms the basis of our decision.
In the course of the discharge procedure for the coming years - that for 1998 is already under way - Parliament will have to examine, as a matter of urgency, whether or not it was too quick to bestow premature praise on the Commission for 1997.
We will be in a position to judge just as soon as the Commission presents its reform programme.
We will be able to use the discharge procedure for 1998 to check whether efficiency, transparency and accountability, and likewise a sincere willingness to provide information, are being displayed vis-à-vis the discharge authority.
Mr President, we all recall that Parliament decided to postpone the discharge for the 1997 financial year pending commitments from the new European Commission regarding internal reform.
In response to this the Commission has entered into various commitments and has certainly adopted many reform measures.
It is fair to say that the new President, Mr Prodi, and his team are certainly committed to implementing the financial control requirements as laid down by this Parliament.
However, the reform of the European Commission must now be taken in the context of the debate that is going to take place in the run-up to the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference and the reform of various EU policies and initiatives.
Existing EU treaties will be amended so as to ensure, for example, that the enlargement process can succeed.
I have no doubt further reform of EU institutions will be analysed in this debate.
But from the perspective of small Member States it is important that, as the European Commission is reformed, it must be done in a way that ensures that small Member States continue to have representation on the Commission.
Mr President, the Commission is now to obtain its discharge for 1997, but in reality it does not deserve it.
1997 was a matter for the old Commission and, therefore, the new Commission does not think that it can accept liability.
It is true that implementation of the Budget for 1997 fell within the old Commission' s remit. The new Commission has, on the other hand, undertaken to carry out a cleaning up exercise following former scandals, and I must admit that I am not impressed at all.
The old mindset which involved sweeping things under the carpet and protecting one' s friends unfortunately still exists.
There are some who think that it is more in our interests to let bygones be bygones and make a fresh start. I do not, however, think we can make a fresh start if we do not tidy things up properly.
I am referring here especially to the earlier scandals involving ECHO.
I am very indignant about the fact that it is so difficult to get any documents handed over on this matter.
I am the rapporteur for ECHO on the Committee on Budgetary Control, and I shall have a lot of difficulty carrying out my work if the Commission will not give me the necessary information.
From the outside, it looks as if the Commission has something to hide.
My investigations also unfortunately suggest that this could be the case.
The Commission is not putting all its cards on the table and is in that way repeating ancient practice on the part of the Commission.
It was this practice which led to the Commission' s downfall.
I can therefore fully support the demand to give Parliament unconditional right of access to documents. Otherwise, we cannot carry out our work.
Thank you, Commissioner Schreyer.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
Response to Second Report of Committee of Independent Experts
The next item is the report (A5-0001/2000) by Mr van Hulten, on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control, on action to be taken on the second report of the Committee of Independent Experts on reform of the Commission.
Mr President, this time last year the European Parliament set up a committee of independent experts chaired by Mr Middelhoek to investigate allegations of fraud, nepotism and corruption in the European Commission.
On 15 March the committee published its first report concluding that: "It is becoming difficult to find anyone who has even the slightest sense of responsibility".
