In the same way, this damage and these tragedies which are happening, as in Romania, are not the problem of the legislative, but of the executive and of the governments.
Furthermore, it is not a fair directive because it ignores the large uninhabited areas, climatic diversity, desert areas and arid areas.
That is how the common position has been worded.
The same can be said with regard to transfers.
Transfers are an example of the distribution of wealth, of solidarity between peoples and territories, because unfortunately the Earth is not perfect and some areas have more and some have less.
Lastly, I am highly critical of the fact that the directive is not accompanied by a study of its impact.
It is very easy for us to demand that others assess its impact but, on environmental questions, we should demand it of ourselves and consider how many people, how many farmers, could be ruined by having to pay the costs.
Some kind of study has been done which has not even been read, and I believe we should carry out impact studies by way of good political practice, rather than just laying down doctrine.
Mr President, through the consolidation of existing directives this framework directive establishes the basic principle of a sustainable water policy in the European Union.
It is a framework for the protection and management of our water - surface, ground, transitional and coastal - through the establishment of river basin districts at national and, in our case in Ireland, cross-border level.
Ireland is very supportive of the common position and many of the European Parliament amendments.
A 25-year roll-out for legislation, for example, is hardly acceptable.
We have no difficulty with the "polluter pays" principle in relation to the recovery of costs on water usage at industrial, commercial and agricultural level.
However, I feel very strongly that as water is life and access to clean drinking water is a basic human right, this directive must allow for a basic domestic water provision free of charge, a quota per household for drinking, cooking and sanitation.
We must of course pay for wastage and luxury use at domestic level and the recovery of costs can be balanced accordingly.
The introduction of water meters is viewed with great suspicion in Ireland where we have had no domestic water charges and hence no meters since 1977.
Meters could be viewed as a very important tool in water management by the new river basin districts, to help the elimination of water wastage and for the proper planning of future requirements.
The whole purpose of this directive is to promote sustainable use of water in the EU.
Water is a scarce and precious natural resource.
Ideally, I would like Amendment No 45 to fall tomorrow so that the common position on Article 9 would hold on water charges.
That would allow for subsidiarity on a cost policy for water charges, with each Member States drawing up its own scheme, so long as the principles of this directive on incentives for sustainable and efficient use of water are fully protected.
If Amendment No 45 does not fall, I will have to move an oral amendment tomorrow to ensure that Member States may grant exemptions to the provisions of this article in order to allow a basic level of water use for domestic purposes before contributions to the recovery of cost of water services.
All legislation must be enforceable and be based on the general principle of political acceptance.
I believe that access to clean drinking water without charge is a basic human right in the developed as well as the developing world.
Mr President, Commissioner, at this point in the debate I am going to insist on certain aspects which, from an agronomic point of view, and since I come from a southern country, I consider to be absolutely essential to this directive.
These include, for example, costs and transfers.
With regard to costs, I would like clarification of what costs we are talking about.
Are we talking about the distribution and sourcing of water?
Are we talking about the quality of the distribution networks?
Are we talking about the nature of the works required to provide water services?
Or are we talking about large-scale hydraulic works and reservoirs?
All these costs added together would be horrendous and would have repercussions for the agricultural sector.
Transfers are defined as the transfer of surface water between different territorial areas.
Is the Commissioner aware that our country has one of the oldest systems of transfers in Europe?
They already existed in ancient times: they had them in Roman times, although on a smaller scale.
One of the most significant transfers - the Tajo-Segura transfer - which has been in use for many years, almost 30 years, has an allowance of 658 hm3 per year.
The largest volume transferred in one year has been 453 and the average volume over twenty years has been over 200.
We cannot be accused of bad management.
Is the Commissioner aware that, of this 263 hm3, we used 25 for irrigation on the left bank of the Levante, 30 for water supplies in the area of the Júcar, 7 for supplies in the southern area of the Júcar and the rest in the Segura, equally divided between supplies and irrigation?
We are not doing a bad job of management.
We cannot be prohibited from carrying out transfers when our economy and the development of our regions depend on it.
I will not tackle the issue of quality and the best available technologies, because I believe that we will return to a discussion of this directive.
Take good note: in this diverse Europe, which we are building in a spirit of mutual cooperation, we have to find diverse solutions, not single solutions.
I therefore appeal to the common sense of the Commission, the Council and this House so that, when voting, they do not impose uniformity on the different countries of Europe in areas where subsidiarity is required.
Commissioner, Andalusia is not Lapland.
. (SV) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I want, of course, to begin by thanking the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and, above all, the rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann for the ambitious and constructive work she has put into the present framework water directive.
Water is one of our most important natural resources, as many speakers have already said.
An ambitious and well-balanced European policy in the field of water is an important component of guaranteed sustainable development for Europe.
Water is also one of the issues to which I shall be devoting particular attention during my term of office.
I am pleased about the spirit of agreement which permeates the amendments that have been submitted to Parliament.
Many of them are based upon the very constructive, informal discussions which have taken place between Parliament and the Council in connection with the first reading.
Most of Parliament' s proposed amendments help improve the text and make it more ambitious.
The Commission can approve 72 of the 108 amendments, either in their entirety, partially or in principle.
Many of the amendments which Parliament has submitted show that reconciliation will be necessary.
With a view to these forthcoming negotiations, I would therefore urge Parliament to vote in favour of an ambitious position.
Firstly, I should like to mention some of my most important arguments.
We now have the opportunity to put into practice those measures to which we agreed under the OSPAR Convention.
Rather than make these objectives legally binding, we must consider their political nature.
This is also reflected in many of Parliament' s amendments.
Where water charges are concerned, the present directive will constitute Europe' s water policy for the next three decades.
It is our duty to ensure from the very start that the present directive provides the right incentives and the proper driving force for a pricing system and an efficient structure of charges which will improve our environment in a cost-effective way.
It sounds good, saying that access to water should be a human right and ought to be free of charge.
But water is not free of charge, any more than houses or food are free of charge.
It is only by means of efficient instruments of control that we can arrive at a situation in which water is better managed and more carefully husbanded as a resource.
I also want to add that, when it comes to groundwater and to water which has been heavily modified by human activities, I support a tighter timetable and a clarification of goals and of criteria for allowing exceptions to the rules. I also support expressly mentioning radioactive substances.
In the course of the debate, many speakers have pointed out how important it is to consult the general public and keep them informed.
I just want to emphasise this further.
It is absolutely crucial that we involve the general public by keeping them well informed and by proceeding to consult them.
This is also expressed in Recital 14.
Allow me also to say to Mr Bowe that, in common with my Scottish colleague, he need have no pangs of conscience about continuing to enjoy a glass of Scotch whisky now and again.
We have not considered it necessary for the Commission to regulate the very limited abstraction of water for whisky production.
Allow me now to comment on some of the areas in a little more detail.
Limiting discharges of hazardous substances into our waters must be one of the most important objectives.
I am glad to see that Parliament' s amendments have focused upon this.
The Commission fully supports the proposal to introduce the commitments under the OSPAR Convention into the text.
We must, however, keep to their precise scope and content.
As I said, their purpose and the timetable for implementing them are political in character.
It would not be in keeping with this to introduce a legally binding timetable.
It must nonetheless be guaranteed that the Member States and the Community are compelled to take measures to achieve the relevant goals and comply with the timetables.
I therefore welcome Amendments Nos 6, 10, 14, 24, 58, 60 and 88 .
The Commission cannot, on the other hand, approve Amendment No 19, in which hazardous substances are defined differently than in OSPAR.
The Commission' s proposal introduces a clear procedure for selecting substances, and so no definition is needed.
Even if I too agree with the contents of Amendments Nos 79 and 106, these go beyond the commitments under OSPAR, and I cannot therefore approve these Amendments.
The Commission can also, in principle, approve Amendment No 60, according to which a timetable is required for implementing the Commission' s proposal to limit discharges of prioritised substances.
Amendment No 59 introduces requirements to the effect that the list of prioritised substances should continually be reviewed.
This would involve legal uncertainty as to the status of the list and cannot, therefore, be approved.
The desire expressed in Amendments Nos 60 and 93 for a list of goals and a list of substances for which no adequate data is available cannot be approved.
Lists of this kind would not have clear legal status and do not fit in with the procedures for adopting the list of prioritised substances.
I would point out in this regard that the OSPAR Convention does not in any way alter existing Community legislation concerning nitrates from the agricultural sector.
The Nitrates Directive will not therefore be influenced by the present framework directive.
I appreciate the fact that Parliament has proved to be flexible over the very sensitive and difficult question of imposing charges for water services.
I can wholeheartedly support the demand that the price of water should be set at a level which creates incentives to use water resources in a sustainable way.
I also support the demand for a suitable contribution from each sector to cover own costs.
I can therefore partly, and in principle, approve Amendments Nos 43-46, together with Amendment No 85.
I believe that we need legally binding requirements stating that the financial costs of water services are to be covered by each economic sector.
This would constitute a clear goal against which progress could be measured.
I therefore support the overall thrust of Amendment No 105, which is in line with the Commission' s original proposal.
I also support a gradual development in the direction of covering environmental costs and the costs of resources.
We are aware of the fact that the price of water and water services is a complicated issue and that account must be taken not only of environmental goals but also of social and economic goals.
This must not, however, be an excuse for subsidising inefficient economic sectors which cause pollution.
We intend shortly to issue a communication from the Commission on precisely this question.
I agree with Parliament that the common position' s sixteen-year timeframe for implementing these measures must be considerably reduced.
The same also applies to the possibility which exists of extending the period of implementation by a further eighteen years.
Amendment No 28, cancelling the third extension period, is an important step in the right direction.
This proposal can therefore be approved.
A period of ten years, as proposed in Amendments Nos 24 and 26, among others, is, on the other hand, too short.
I believe that consideration ought to be given to wording the overall definition of the requirements under the proposal in such a way that it includes a strict and explicit condition to the effect that causing deterioration of the environment must be avoided.
The proposal must also include more stringent criteria for establishing lesser environmental objectives and for extending deadlines in connection with heavily modified or artificial bodies of water.
This applies to Amendments Nos 6, 24, 25, 27, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 78, 80, 102 and 104.
These Amendments may in large part be approved and will be supported until such time as an overall solution can be found.
To comply with the demands in Amendments Nos 27 and 29, to the effect that the Commission should approve every extension, would be going too far, and these cannot be approved.
Another important area is protection of the groundwater.
We need both a starting point and a final goal if we are to reverse the upward trend in pollution.
We also need stricter criteria for interpreting the results of any monitoring.
The most important parts of Parliament' s Amendments Nos 25 and 73 can therefore be approved in principle.
The new definition in Amendment No 72 is, however, too strict and cannot be applied for this purpose.
I would propose that Amendment No 92 should be incorporated into a broader solution.
Amendment No 71 does not take account of seasonal variations and annual changes in the level of the groundwater.
The proposal cannot therefore be approved.
The Commission considers it unrealistic and unnecessary to lay down standards guaranteeing that the least intensive water purification is adequate to ensure that surface water is of drinking water quality.
Instead, we prefer an addition to those measures which are required in accordance with Article 11 to promote activities in this area.
The good status which is required under this proposal ought to guarantee that the demand for surface water of good quality is fulfilled.
This part of Amendment No 41 cannot, therefore, be approved.
The Commission appreciates Parliament' s efforts to guarantee that the so-called combined approach is given a central role.
This approach and its scope, which the Commission can in principle approve, are defined by Amendments Nos 22 and 47.
In order to achieve the greatest possible legal clarity and proportionality, we wish, however, to reformulate Amendment No 47 and to add a de minimis provision.
The transfer of water is already covered by controls, but explicitly mentioning it makes the text clearer.
These parts of Amendments Nos 49 and 87 can, therefore, be approved.
It is nonetheless unnecessary to make it a condition that all the measures for controlling demand should be adopted.
The proposal already specifies that water must be abstracted in accordance with the ecological needs in the river basin district concerned.
These parts of Amendments Nos 49 and 87 cannot, therefore, be approved.
The Commission approves Amendment No 76 to the effect that radioactive substances are explicitly to be included in the proposal.
To summarise, the Commission is able to approve 72 amendments, either in their entirety, partially or in principle.
The following amendments cannot be approved: 1, 4, 9, 11, 13, 15, 19, 23, 39, 40, 51, 59, 61, 64, 66, 70, 71, 71, 72, 74, 77, 79, 81, 83, 87, 89, 90, 91, 95, 97, 98, 100, 101, 103, 106 and 107.
Finally, I want to say that I welcome the efforts which Parliament has made to try to solve the questions on which the Council takes other views.
Important progress has been made, and the constructive tone of the discussions creates a good working climate for future discussions.
A number of obstacles remain, but I am convinced that, as the legislative work progresses, we shall achieve our common goal of creating a water policy we can be proud of.
Parliament' s adopting a clear position will be an important contribution to an ambitious, European water policy for the next three decades.
I would like to hear the Commissioner's view on Amendment No 45.
I may have missed it in the list she gave out.
. I accept that.
Thank you, Mrs Wallström.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 p.m.
Financial instrument for the environment (LIFE)
The next item is the recommendation for second reading (A4-0014/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Regulation on a financial instrument for the environment (LIFE) (Rapporteur: Mrs Lienemann).
rapporteur.
(FR) Mr President, we have already had the opportunity, at the first reading, to examine this report and I was given to believe in committee that there was a broad consensus within this House.
LIFE is the only budget line for direct assistance for the environment in the Community budget, and one cannot help but note that it does not live up to our ambitions since the amounts allocated to it have been stagnating for years. Despite the enlargement which has already taken place, when we renewed the first LIFE programme to move on to the second, despite enlargement, the level of appropriations remained the same.
And then we see that, increasingly, the regions, the various operators, businesses, associations, are submitting LIFE projects, both for LIFE-NATURE and LIFE-ENVIRONMENT, projects that are of excellent quality, which following technical assessment by all the competent committees are unanimously found to be worthy of European Union support, but we still cannot fund them, for lack of budget appropriations.
