The resignation marked the end of a bitter struggle between an increasingly confident Parliament and a European Commission mired in allegations of scandal.
Since then the Brussels landscape has changed beyond recognition; a new, reinvigorated Parliament has been elected and a new Commission confirmed in office.
Speaking in this House on 21 July President-designate Prodi undertook to take full account of the second report of the Committee of Independent Experts on Commission reform, which contains 90 detailed recommendations and which we are debating today.
The new Commission has already taken important steps to move away from the way it used to function.
A code of conduct for Commissioners and their private offices has been adopted.
In a symbolic but significant gesture Commissioners have voluntarily renounced their entitlement to the tax-free purchase of alcohol, tobacco, petrol and consumer goods.
New rules have been drawn up and implemented governing the appointment of senior officials.
The number of departments has been reduced.
The Commission, in my opinion, has shown a clear and unprecedented commitment to change and for this they are to be congratulated.
The overall aim of the reforms must be to create a strong, honest European public administration equipped to carry out its tasks in an effective and efficient manner; an administration in which officials are provided with the means to carry out their tasks and are held fully accountable at all levels; an administration that recognises and rewards merit and encourages officials to develop their full potential.
In order to achieve this, action is required in four areas.
First, financial management and control within the Commission must be improved.
One of the main problems is the lack of a functioning system of financial control.
The Commission's DGs must be made fully responsible for their own expenditure, including financial control.
A new independent audit system service must be set up.
DGs must publish their own annual accounts so as to enable a clear identification of problem areas and set annual targets for reducing fraud and irregularities.
In return for this greater degree of autonomy, managers must be made fully and personally responsible for their actions.
It is clear that the transition to such a new system will take time.
Changes to the Financial Regulation will be required and Parliament must have its say on those changes.
But while the Commission must ensure that it respects the Treaty and the Financial Regulation in the transitional phase, this must not be an excuse for inertia.
Urgent change is required today.
Second, the fight against fraud, mismanagement and nepotism must be strengthened, firstly by creating a culture in which they cannot thrive.
This requires a clear example to be set by Commissioners and senior staff as well as adequate training and secondly, by reinforcing the existing mechanisms for dealing with fraud.
OLAF, the Commission agency set up earlier this year must be placed under the direction of an independent European public prosecutor whose job will be to prepare for prosecution by national criminal courts, criminal offences committed against the financial interests of the Union by Members and officials of the European institutions.
A proposal can be made, a proposal should be made, on the basis of Article 280 of the Treaty, by the middle of this year.
Third, standards in European public life must be upheld.
The political crisis which led to the downfall of the Commission earlier this year clearly demonstrated the need for unambiguous and enforceable rules of conduct.
A number of codes have since been introduced.
They must be assessed by Parliament and should be made legally binding.
The European institutions should follow the example of a number of countries, most notably the United Kingdom, and institute a committee for standards in public life, with a mandate to give advice on professional ethics and rules of conduct in the European institutions.
Whistle-blowers who act in good faith must be protected.
At the end of last year Mr Kinnock announced new measures for the protection of whistle-blowers.
They must be implemented without delay.
Although such measures can never be an alternative for good management, they must be an escape valve when something goes wrong.
Crucially, reforms must not be limited to the Commission.
Parliament must consider itself the need for improvements to its internal rules, administrative procedures and management practices.
Finally, the Commission's human resource policy must be modernised.
It is clearly no longer suited to the requirements of a modern, multinational organisation.
The social dialogue has often acted as a brake on reform and its overhaul is long overdue.
A career with the European institutions must become more attractive.
Too many young, new officials are leaving their jobs after just a few years.
Merit must be recognised and rewarded, specific skills training should be a sine qua non for promotion to a higher grade.
The promotions procedure must be made fairer and more transparent.
Last but not least the pay and benefits package must be reviewed.
It must become more flexible and more responsible to labour market conditions.
It must be rid of some of its more outdated elements; and it must deal with the legitimate concerns of the general public who cannot understand why European civil servants should be paid an expatriation allowance indefinitely in a Europe of open borders, or pay a level of taxes that is often well below that of Member States.
Commissioner Kinnock will, tomorrow, present his communication on reform.
This communication must contain a clear timetable.
With a new Commission and a new Parliament up and running the momentum for reform is now as strong as it ever has been and probably ever will be.
Enlargement of the Union is just a few years away.
Now is the time for Europe to put its own house in order; to instil in its institutions - as the independent experts might have said - a sense of responsibility.
In June of last year Europe's voters gave a clear signal that they are fed up with endless stories about mismanagement and nepotism.
There is a very simple way to deal with those stories.
Let us get rid of mismanagement and nepotism.
Mr President, I do not want to be misunderstood - I sincerely hope this does not happen - and I should therefore like to start by saying that I am, of course, in favour of combating fraud and firmly support the appropriate, necessary reforms.
This is not a straightforward issue and calls for a much more wide-ranging analysis, but I shall restrict myself to raising only a few points, in order to make people more aware, if possible, of what we are talking about.
All the experts can provide information and news, formulate opinions and give advice, but, they have no political or elective responsibility, and rightly so.
I nevertheless believe that politicians should look into what can be gleaned from an expert report and what cannot be taken en masse in a spirit which, on some occasions, I have felt in the past and still feel to be self-destructive.
I believe - and I shall only pick up on a few ideas - that Parliament alone, and no one else, can exert an influence over its Members. If this were not the case, the European Parliament' s authority and representativeness would be seriously undermined in the coming years, and this institution would not move forward, as it should.
It is just as important for no-one to be able to or have to refuse the European Parliament or its committees any documentation.
Members of Parliament must possess the qualities of morality, discipline and discretion over delegated issues innately, and these certainly cannot be imposed on them by anyone else.
I would point out that there is no European legal system, but that a different legal system exists in each Member State.
We run the risk of delegating issues relating to the same offences which will then be punished in different ways.
I agree that an investigation system should be introduced, but I am also absolutely convinced that we must recognise the right to equal respect for dignity and, in any case, the equal need for the right to a defence.
I am opposed to European Community officials being accused of criminal acts at the drop of a hat: whistle-blowing is a method that has no place in the third millennium.
In conclusion, Mr President, Parliament must introduce a principle of democracy: we must implement reforms which allow Parliament to grow and expand its powers, not go into reverse.
This debate on the van Hulten report brings to a close one of the most traumatic periods for the European institutions since their creation in 1957.
The refusal of the European Parliament to grant discharge and the definitive refusal for the 1996 budget; the motion of censure tabled in this House a year ago for differing reasons; and the first report of the Committee of Independent Experts on the reform of the Commission which led to the mass resignation of the Commission itself, are now part of European folklore.
Those of us involved in these historic events are well aware that none of the upheaval would have been caused had we not acted with parliamentary power to press for changes in the way in which the Commission operated.
Remember that the Council of Ministers, absent again this evening from our debate, approved the 1997 discharge - not the 1996 - on the very day the Commission itself resigned on 15 March.
Now we come to the second report of the Committee of Independent Experts which we already had the opportunity to welcome and briefly debate last September.
Our greatest concern in the EPP is to ensure that public confidence in the European Commission is restored.
Further steps to build a strong Europe will be to no avail if the European peoples perceive that there is no adequate system of democratic accountability for over-zealous officials.
Under no circumstances will we concede ground which we have won over the past few months, which we believe to be in the interests of openness and transparency.
We are therefore concerned to see the flurry of Commission announcements in recent weeks by Commissioner Kinnock suggesting policy proposals of various kinds to be put in a White Paper shortly.
While conveying a desire to proceed rapidly, it also gives the impression that the Commission is in transmission rather than listening mode.
Our concern is strengthened if the rumour reported a few days ago is true - namely that the Commission wants to limit severely the access of Parliament to information.
This was, after all, one of the causes of the downfall of the last Commission.
Have the lessons not been learnt?
The knowledge that the framework relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission still remain to be negotiated led to our disagreement with the rapporteur when we debated his report in committee.
We could, in no way, agree with his view that it would be demeaning for Parliament to set out detailed instructions as to what we wanted the Commission to take up in its reform package.
The less precise, Mr van Hulten, we are in our resolutions, the more room it gives the Commission and your former colleagues in the Council to do what they like.
We believe the vast number of recommendations of the Wise Men' s report should be implemented.
We have, as the EPP-ED group, submitted all the recommendations of the Wise Men' s report in committee and many of them have now been put into the report, entirely changing the nature of the van Hulten report in committee.
We have resubmitted a few amendments which fell in committee, in particular, our desire to see the codes of conduct revised specifically to include the reference to merit and managerial capacity which you, Commissioner, accepted - when we had our hearings last September - should be included in these codes of conduct, particularly when considering appointments and promotion.
Looking to the future, we know that we are at the beginning of a long process of continuing reform in the European Commission.
We want in particular to see the hard-working and highly competent norm for Commission officials acknowledged in the outside world - a reputation that has been darkened by the inappropriate conduct of a few individuals.
Commissioner, you will be aware from your presence in the last Commission why the crisis occurred.
In a nutshell: there were programmes being run for which there were insufficient staff resources available.
We urge you to take the opportunity to establish the real staffing needs of the Commission based on the essential activities for which it is responsible.
Our position was made very clear on this topic in the 2000 budget.
We will be vigilant over the next five years to ensure the reforms now being suggested are fully implemented and will support efforts made to modernise institutions.
But, equally, we will not hesitate to withdraw our support financially or otherwise should steps be taken which do not correspond to the openness promised by Commission President Romano Prodi prior to his nomination.
Let us hope that we can avoid institutional upheavals by having an ongoing dialogue which assumes from the outset that Parliament will be an equal partner in deciding the outcome of Commission reform.
Mr President, I must start by apologising that I cannot be nearly as dramatic as Mr Elles in my presentation.
Can I first thank Mr van Hulten for this report.
It is an excellent report.
It would have been wrong for Parliament to have put in willy nilly every single recommendation that came from an external body because Parliament should have its own opinion on these issues.
It is right for us to have a focused report which is what Mr van Hulten has produced.
Can I invite Mr Elles not to put the cart before the horse.
Yes, a lot of things were lost by the Socialists but they have not been won in plenary yet, and may I warn him that may not be the case tomorrow.
I should like to thank Commissioner Kinnock for all his efforts so far.
He has been clear that his commitment has been to produce a radical change.
Central to this is the attempt to produce and engender responsibility.
It is clear that this needs to be developed at all levels and it needs to recognise the needs of each level within the Commission.
It is clear that we need to see a change in the Financial Regulation.
That is important.
We need to stop people passing the buck from one to another.
Where failure is occurring within the Commission we need to hold people responsible.
We need to be assured that consistent under-performance must lead to dismissal.
This is natural elsewhere but it seems to be an extremely radical suggestion when it is put to the Commission.
We cannot continue with a situation where incompetence, mismanagement and fraud are costing the European taxpayers money and providing them with a poor service.
I will give you one example of this.
In the 1998 Court of Auditors report an exchange rate miscalculation in relation to Italian wine cost the taxpayers of Europe GBP 8 to 10 million.
It is clear that is not acceptable.
What happened to the person who was responsible for that miscalculation?
We need a system which provides incentives and promotion and we need to see this promotion based on merit.
We recognise that most of the officials within the Commission are extremely hard-working.
But we also recognise that some of the practices are outdated.
We look forward to reading the full Commission proposal on reform and we look forward to working out the detail alongside the Commission because, unlike what Mr Elles has just said, the Commissioner has made a commitment to discuss it with Parliament between now and 1 March.
We also need to recognise that people who live in glasshouses should not throw stones.
The European Parliament has not exactly been clean in its approach to things throughout its history.
We have a long way to go before we are perfect ourselves.
Our own staff policy is outdated.
Some of our working practices need radical reform.
I hope that the European Parliament will be hanging onto the coattails of the Commission in this reform process.
We recognise the proposals on activity-based budgeting.
We recognise that means discipline on the part of Commission officials and we recognise also that we have a responsibility within Parliament on discipline when we talk about negative priorities.
Finally, can I say that the Commission needs to work on its relationships with the public.
European taxpayers need to be re-assured.
The fate of the Commission, of the whole European Union, rests on delivery of this reform.
That is the key issue, delivery of these proposals.
Mr President, I would like to start by extending my compliments to the rapporteur, Mr van Hulten, on his first report.
I very much admire him for keeping his spirits up at a time when he was inundated with so many amendments.
I think that the report drawn up by the Wise Men has been useful and I think that it is also useful for this Parliament - as already stated by Mrs Morgan - that we ourselves should ask for expertise from outside for once to see how our administration is run.
We have submitted an amendment to this effect.
From the many points made by Mr van Hulten in his report, I would like to highlight a few, not necessarily in order of importance but just randomly.
Firstly, I think that the Commission should pay much more attention to the proper storage of documents.
The Commission' s records leave a great deal to be desired.
We noticed this when we had to investigate the Flechard affair, which, as it happens, has still not been sorted out.
Curiously, very important documents had gone missing from the cabinets, even from those of the President and of various Directorates-General, and this is clearly something which should not happen.
If Parliament want to carry out proper inspections, these documents must be available, and I would like to know what the Commission intends to do to improve this situation.
I would also like to say a few words about ex post financial control.
This has also been partly dealt with in the van Hulten report. I think it would be useful if we were to give report figures per category and per sector on how the budget is implemented.
The general impression at present is that anything budget-related within Europe is bad.
It is clear that, over the past couple of years, we have noticed an upward trend in agriculture and a downward one in structural expenditure.
Is this possible?
I would like to suggest to the Commission that it prescribe a deadline by which the reforms have to be carried out.
If we admit new Member States then we need to put our own House in order first.
Mr President, I would firstly like to thank Mr van Hulten.
