Moreover, the manufacturers will not be financially accountable until 2006, when a good number of the existing vehicles will no longer be on the market.
As for the remaining vehicles, we could nevertheless provide for some means of sharing costs, as is proposed in Amendments Nos 44 and 45 by Mr Lange, the only ones that seem compatible with the balancing of the common position and with the trials underway in some countries, and we should therefore support them.
Mr President, this is an extremely bad directive.
First of all, as my colleague Mr Bowis has pointed out, it is retrospective and that is wrong in principle.
Secondly, it dumps huge costs on the European motor industry which would damage competitiveness and damage employment.
In this Parliament we constantly talk about the need to promote employment and jobs in Europe and yet we constantly pass measures which will have the effect of reducing employment.
I suggest to you that the directive is bad in another respect, which has not been examined well enough in this debate. It is like so much European legislation.
It is far too prescriptive.
It sets in stone one particular model of recycling.
The production line was invented about a hundred years ago, I believe, by Henry Ford and what we are proposing to do here is to create a sort of nineteenth century production line in reverse - to dismantle vehicles, to take the pieces apart and seek to recycle them.
One thing we should stop and think about is the fact that there is a very uncertain market for recycled plastic bumpers of cars.
The plastics industry for the most part does not want to take these things back and cannot economically do so.
There is already a very successful industry out there which is shredding cars, recovering metals and recovering energy by the incineration of the non-metallic parts.
This is a very environmentally reasonable approach.
It is just as good environmentally to burn old plastic as to burn new oil for energy recovery.
This method of disposal of cars carries no cost and so would eliminate the whole issue of who pays because the "dead" car would actually have a small value going into the recycling and reclamation process.
I would oppose this directive on the basis that it is too prescriptive, it ignores what is actually going on in the car recycling market at the moment and it sets in stone methods which are not necessarily the best environmentally, and are certainly very damaging economically.
Mr President, the common position is sound, but it is up to Parliament to improve the common position on end-of-life vehicles.
The Social-Democratic Group has submitted a few important proposals for improvement over the past couple of days.
I would especially draw your attention to Amendment No 45, in which a choice is made in favour of laying the cost of disassembly and recycling at the door of the manufacturer, for new cars at any rate.
Consequently, consideration will also be given to recycling during the conception phase and production.
For the cars currently on the road, it would be reasonable to share the cost, for example by setting up a fund such as that in the Netherlands.
The common position stipulates that manufacturers should not only bear the cost, they should also take back end-of-life vehicles.
This is a big problem in my opinion.
I urge that car manufacturers should most definitely not be given the task of organising the dismantling and recycling of vehicles, as they would gain an excessive hold over the second-hand components market.
They would then determine their own prices.
Anyone who has been in an old car knows that this is to the detriment of the consumer and the amateur mechanic.
The European consumer organisation, which has asked us to support the common position on this point, is to my mind letting the consumer down.
A second argument for keeping the dismantling of cars out of the manufacturers' clutches is the cost of transport.
If car manufacturers all set up their own dismantling companies, this will necessitate transporting end-of-life vehicles over long distances.
This is environmentally unfriendly but also expensive and does not benefit the consumer either.
I would therefore appreciate your support for Amendment No 45.
Mr President, Commissioner, I have asked to speak again so that I can say a few more words at the close of this debate.
If you travel to the Netherlands, you will find that every last owner can get rid of his car cost-free.
You will also find that these cars are suitably disposed of, that new material flows have been opened up in order to recycle materials, that 85% of the weight of a car is recycled and that 92% of all cars in the Netherlands are recycled.
This is financed by a fund to which the buyer of a new car contributes.
Should this be condemned ecologically, Frau Breyer?
I do not think so.
The Netherlands has an exemplary model for disposing of cars as per the wishes of the directive and the issue of whether the buyer of a new car should pay or, in the case of end-of-life vehicles currently driving around, the manufacturer, has nothing, absolutely nothing, to do with ecology; it is a simple question of competition!
The issue here is whether a European manufacturer should pay EUR 250 million or a Korean manufacturer, say, EUR 2 million.
In terms of the people who build cars here in Europe, I am in favour of not making competition unequal but, in terms of environmental protection, I want freedom from costs for the last owner, to be financed by a special fund, and manufacturer responsibility for new cars, which will force them to assume responsibility for building recyclable cars!
(Applause from the PSE Group)
Mr President, the proposal we are discussing has a huge amount of advantages, mainly in the interests of preventing waste and encouraging re-use, the recovery and recycling of components and the recovery of materials, etc. I think we have tabled a sound proposal.
The main thread of the discussion is about whether or not the manufacturer, the vendor, or whoever, should take the end-of-life vehicle back without any cost.
I will only give the example of my own country to illustrate how this system functions there without any problems.
We have reached an agreement with all the parties involved.
These include car manufacturers, second-hand car dealers, the federation of the car industry, the metal processing firms, shredding firms and the government.
An environmental policy agreement has been signed on a voluntary basis.
The car industry - and Belgium produces a great many cars- did not have any problem with that.
Belgians can deliver their cars back to the vendor without any cost.
In connection with this, we have noticed how - quite contrary to what has been said here to the effect that the scheme would be to the detriment of employment - a number of small businesses have taken the recycling of materials to heart and are doing very well.
Some businesses have become hi-tech businesses, because they managed to recycle certain materials, even materials which are not yet included in the directive.
So this means that we are developing a new sector and new employment and doing the environment a huge favour into the bargain.
I am in favour of collection free of charge.
It worked for us.
Why would it not work elsewhere?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for an interesting debate in which many important arguments have been presented.
Would you be so kind as to bear with me for a few minutes.
Allow me briefly to comment on some of the assumptions and principles behind the present directive.
Allow me also to begin by commenting on and responding to a couple of the most important arguments in this debate.
First of all, I think I should repeat some of the basic facts which Mr Florenz and others have already mentioned.
What we are discussing here is the fact that close on ten million cars are scrapped every year in the European Union, resulting in approximately as many millions of tons of waste.
This means that almost ten million tons of waste are created by these cars, and approximately seven per cent of the latter are abandoned out in the open.
Moreover, they constitute environmentally hazardous substances of the worst kind.
Approximately ten per cent of lead production is to be found in cars, but also cadmium, chromium, mercury and other very dangerous substances.
This is something you already know, but I would nonetheless also repeat it for the benefit of those who are listening.
Cars are one of the fastest growing sources of waste we have in Europe.
We know that waste from cars exists and we know how we ought to be dealing with it, and there is no excuse for not taking action.
The present directive has three aims. First of all, we want to stop heavy metals from being used in the manufacture of new cars.
Secondly, we want to establish the fact that the manufacturer is liable.
We can no longer take care of these matters at the end of a product' s life-cycle. Instead, we should avoid creating so much waste.
We should see to it that we recycle as much as possible of the various contents of a product.
Thirdly, we wish to achieve the recycling objectives specified in the present directive.
These are the three most important aims of the directive.
This is, of course, because it is a waste of resources for us not to ensure that materials in cars are recycled.
It is, above all, the manufacturer' s resources we are wasting if we do not get to grips with a car' s life-cycle.
Two important questions have arisen in this regard. Yes, there are in fact more than two questions, but I want to mention just two of the most important.
First of all: who should pay?
And secondly: are we reducing the European car industry' s competitiveness by means of the present proposal?
The first question, then, is about who should pay.
The directive states that the polluter should pay and that the cost is to be borne mainly by the manufacturer in accordance with the principles to be found in the EU' s treaty concerning the manufacturer' s liability.
It is nonetheless clear that the cost will be borne jointly by manufacturers and consumers.
We have calculated that the cost of recycling cars does not constitute more than one per cent of the price of a new car.
Do we imagine, then, that the cost would disappear if we were not to adopt this directive?
No. Clearly, we shall all have to bear the cost of serious damage to the environment, but it will be very much greater.
Moreover, the cost will have to be borne in the future.
The cost will not therefore disappear, but now we are clarifying whose liability it is and how the cost is to be distributed.
Are we therefore talking about a car industry in crisis?
Is it an unprofitable industry which we are discussing and which we really have to help by not imposing more taxes upon it?
Is it the case that the car industry definitely cannot afford these?
Is it the case that the motives behind the proposed measures are in actual fact concerned with reducing the competitiveness of the European car industry?
No, of course not.
It is quite the opposite.
Do you believe that consumer demand for environmentally friendly cars and more fuel-efficient cars is going to decline in the future?
What kind of requirements do you think our children and grandchildren and future legislators are going to make of cars?
Naturally, that they should be environmentally friendly, that they should be recyclable, that they should be fuel-efficient and that they should not pollute our environment.
It is, of course, only in this way that we can create a future for the car industry.
We must create forms of motive power which are not damaging to health and which are of such a kind that we can deal with the relevant waste, recycle materials and compete by means of environmentally friendly and fuel-efficient cars.
The fact that we have a European car industry which has already made great strides more than properly compensates for the fact that there are, in fact, a good many cars on European roads for which they must take responsibility.
The cost is not insurmountable; nor is the task an impossible one.
If we develop motive power of the kind I have described, I am quite certain that market forces and commercial interests in the car industry will ensure that mechanisms develop for dealing with both the cost and the workload.
These will consist of everything from insurance to sensible and effective scrapping and recycling systems.
The industry itself will ensure that these systems are introduced in Europe.
They will not represent an insurmountable cost for the European car industry.
They will instead help industry to be in the vanguard of eventually producing environmentally friendly and more fuel-efficient cars.
We must do this for the sake of the environment.
The costs will not disappear. Nor will the waste disappear.
But, otherwise, we must all of us, as taxpayers or citizens, foot the bill. What is more, the costs will be higher the longer we wait before taking action.
That is what I should like to say by way of introduction.
I also want to comment on the question as to whether there is to be any retroactive legislation.
If we assume that, on average, a car has a life of eleven years, do Members, indeed does anyone, believe that we should wait for eleven years before we get to grips with this problem?
Do you think that, when we legislate about chemicals, we should say that we are ignoring those chemicals which are already on the market and that we are legislating only for what is to be produced in the future?
Clearly, we must consider the problem which exists here and now and the challenge presented by the existing range of cars.
It is still not an insurmountable problem.
We can deal with it.
We already have an infrastructure.
We have what we require in order to deal with end-of-life cars.
I naturally hope that the result of today' s vote will be a good one.
If I have not already done so, I would also thank Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz for the hard work he has put into this proposal on the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
In fact, it is in many respects pioneering work when it comes to re-use and manufacturer' s liability.
I believe it will have very positive and noticeable effects on the environment.
We cannot continue to close our eyes to these matters.
As I have said, we have both the knowledge and the resources to cope with these issues.
After the first reading in the European Parliament in 1999, the Commission' s proposal ended up in an awkward political situation in the Council.
However, we obtained a well-balanced common position in July during the Finnish Presidency.
Now, we must ensure that the present legislative process is concluded successfully.
A total of 48 amendments have been tabled.
The Commission can adopt 10 amendments in their entirety.
Three amendments can be partially approved, and one can be approved in principle.
Certain amendments concern improvements to the Commission' s proposal which we adopted as early as at the first reading or else they reintroduce into the directive such parts of the original proposal as the Council has removed.
This applies to Amendment No 5, excluding section 1; 8 and 9, section 1; 10 and 12, section 3; 15, 16, 20, 22, 24 and 25.
These amendments can all be approved.
Amendments Nos 6 and 21 are new; the Commission can approve these.
The Commission can also approve Amendment No 26 with certain editorial changes.
I want to emphasise that a number of the other amendments affecting the proposal' s basic components involve a considerable watering-down of the level of environmental protection aimed at by the common position.
They cannot therefore be approved.
Parliament has traditionally made a major contribution to strengthening environmental legislation in Europe.
It would amaze and depress me if it were not to do so today.
I am very concerned about certain amendments from Parliament which bring the absolutely basic pillars of the present proposal into question.
These concern, for example, the phasing-out of heavy metals, manufacturer' s liability and the requirement for recycling.
I want to deal with these amendments on a group-by-group basis.
Amendments Nos 4, 11, 12, 13, 28, 30, 32, 37, 42 and 48 concern the phasing-out of heavy metals.
Amendment No 12 involves a delay of at least ten years in bringing the provision into force.
Amendments Nos 13, 28, 32, 37, 42 and 48 involve introducing unnecessary conditions and exceptions.
This would mean that the process of replacing dangerous substances would be implemented more slowly.
Amendments Nos 4, 11 and 30 mean that heavy metals have to be separated from the waste before recycling.
The Commission considers that the type of phasing-out proposed in the common position is easier to apply from a technical point of view.
Amendments Nos 17, 18, 27, 34, 36, 38, 44 and 45 relate to the manufacturer' s liability.
The compromise reached by the Council is fair but fragile.
The Commission does not consider that the amendments would improve the balance without, at the same time, creating tensions.
