The rapporteur refers to the need to implement an integrated approach to new EU Structural Fund plans and programmes.
They must promote a decentralised, efficient and comprehensive partnership based on the skills and commitment of all sectors in regional and local authorities.
This is very sensible because key economic and social difficulties in our country cannot be overcome unless there is key integration between national, European and local funding.
.
(FR) This report takes us back to the question of why we even have a regional policy.
In order to reduce disparities between regions, of course.
But more especially because, even though at first sight the European market guarantees us improved functioning of the economy, it may also be a source of inequality.
Jacques Delors was accustomed to saying that the market was short-sighted and hence the political need to reduce disparities.
It is precisely this phenomenon of solidarity which lies behind the European social model, which we are all in favour of, and which gave rise to the idea of economic and social cohesion.
This is a real political objective, alongside economic and monetary affairs, drawn up in collaboration with Member States, regions and local communities, with the Commission itself responsible for issuing guidelines in order to show Member States what direction to take in order to achieve the objectives required in the context of programming.
This is why I shall support this report, despite regretting the fact that, for timetabling reasons, the European Parliament was only consulted at a very late date on the guidelines intended to assist Member States, regions and local communities in the programming of Objectives 1, 2 and 3.
Moreover, I would also urge this House to take into consideration the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, adding a whole raft of thoughts on key areas such as combating social exclusion, support for the social economy and the implementation of the employment strategy.
Mrs Schroedter' s report marks a further step towards the transparency and effectiveness of structural aid.
It highlights the increasing vital role of all the parties involved, chiefly those involved at a local level, who are the only ones able to define specific requirements and social problems, hence our determination to ensure that the partnerships to be established are true partnerships, which are decentralised and involve all the agents concerned.
This is the reason for the request which we are putting forward again to establish a management unit for structural assistance in the Member States, which would coordinate the implementation and administration of aid.
In order to do so, the monitoring committees must be opened to include Members of the European Parliament, associations and industrialists concerned by the projects and also civil society.
These guidelines represent a step towards the improved effectiveness of Community structural aid.
Amended again as such by the Schroedter report, they are a step in the right direction.
They also call for a general debate on the future of the cohesion policy after 2006, but that is another subject.
In the meantime, let us support this first step.
- This report calls for drastic cuts in the level of illegal state aid dished out by some Member States.
Although I wholeheartedly support this aim, I would much rather see such aid eliminated altogether.
In my mind, illegal state aid amounts to little more than state-sponsored social dumping.
We all oppose social dumping when perpetrated by fat cat industry, we must also oppose it when perpetrated by governments.
If we are to have an effective single market that makes European industry globally competitive and generates wealth and employment for all Europeans, then we must have a level playing field.
Illegal state aid, by contrast, destroys competitive companies and creates unemployment.
There are, of course, cases when state aid can be necessary and legitimate, for example helping companies restructure.
In all such cases, however, strict criteria must be met and prior approval from the European Commission gained.
Whether we are talking about beef to France or about backhanders to industry, EU Member States must not be allowed to flout the law.
I enthusiastically support the report's proposal to publish a "scoreboard" showing the amount of state aid per Member State.
Countries that claim to be at the heart of Europe but which systematically break its rules should be named and shamed and their hypocrisy revealed.
Member States cannot be allowed to proclaim European solidarity in public while trying to undermine the single market in private.
I take some mild encouragement from the fact that levels of state aid to industry in Europe appear to be falling.
Much remains to be done, however, and I call on the Commission to be far tougher in exposing the subsidy junkies of Europe.
.
(PT) The Commission' s main instruments for overcoming regional disparities are the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund. It is therefore crucial that the European Parliament drafts its broad indicative guidelines without threatening the principle of subsidiarity, given that establishing the development strategy for each country falls to the respective Member States.
Unfortunately, the European Commission has already moved ahead with its guidelines and Parliament' s position on the programmes for 2000-2006 does not carry much weight.
It is nevertheless important to reiterate the need for the main priority of these funds to be the development of the countries and regions with the greatest problems and of the outermost regions, of which the Portuguese regions of the Azores and Madeira are examples. This must be done with the objective of achieving economic and social cohesion.
The truth is though, that the Commission' s guidelines do not fully meet these objectives.
On the other hand, it is crucial that there are precise indications and sufficient funds in areas such as creating decent jobs - with rights - effectively promoting equality in law and opportunity, and supporting the social economy and solidarity. There must also be support for rural development, for small and medium-sized enterprises, for improving the quality of life of urban populations in deprived areas, specifically in the field of social housing, with a view to achieving sustainable urban development.
.
(IT) While Article 158 of the EC Treaty aims to promote the harmonious development of all of the Communities, we must say that the goal of eliminating disparities is still a long way from being fulfilled, or rather in some cases, as with Italy' s Objective 1 zones, paradoxically, disparities are being exacerbated, particularly because of the continuing weak approach of the structural apparatus to Community procedures and the persistent muddle of procedures; despite the changes to the rules, the Community structures have not yet been streamlined.
In the first place, if administrative procedures are not simplified, it will be hard to attain Community objectives on reform, with a view to greater efficiency and concentration.
In this respect, the Commission document has shortcomings, as it makes no recommendation to the Member States to simplify procedures and national legislation for the presentation and examination of projects by the national authorities, and for their funding, execution and monitoring.
SMEs, micro-enterprises and craft businesses in particular are still "weak operators" , given that it is precisely for them that the regulatory and administrative constraints imposed by some Member States, including Italy, are major obstacles to accessing Structural Funds.
A considerable stumbling block is the fact that the regions and other operators find it impossible and are incapable of making plans in time.
In view of this, in accordance with the decision on the 97/99 guidelines (Howitts report), the Commission should have consulted Parliament in time. In fact, it found a sort of convenient excuse in the shortening of the programming stage in the Member States, and it published the guidelines back in July 1999, even before the new Parliament had taken up its legislative duties, thereby preventing Parliament itself from having any influence on the current content of the guidelines.
This is why the mid-term review, provided for under Article 42 of Regulation 1260/99, will be of considerable importance.
In general, the current guidelines cannot be considered as clear or transparent.
They merely touch on the - nevertheless important - issue of the possibility of assessing the progress made in relation to verifiable objectives which are completely consonant with the strategies followed in Community policies, and they do not pay enough attention to the implications of enlargement, so much so that they do not contain specific provisions or clarifications as regards either regional and national authorities, or candidate countries.
That said, the differing approach adopted in the guidelines, which are not geared to geographical objectives, but rather to policy areas, can be considered as positive.
While in theory this may meet the need for concentration and therefore the efficiency of interventions, we cannot help wondering whether the current situation of the Objective 1 zones allows, in practice, a policy of integrated interventions, for which an operational instrument to coordinate the appropriations is necessary.
We could then, theoretically, also support the Commission' s call for a management unit for structural assistance in the Member States, with the task of coordinating the implementation and administration of structural assistance there,provided that this unit does not become a centralising instrument at supranational level, but guarantees real help for those zones - and I stress this once again - which, owing to a whole string of converging negative factors, have not yet harnessed Structural Funds to sufficient levels, with the result that replacing the geographical objective with policy areas could, in fact, amount to a negative intervention.
The guidelines, as adopted by the Commission, are very limited because, instead of meeting the aim of providing guidance, they are providing a shopping list of possible measures, a shopping list which, as it fails to set priorities in ascending order, could even put the Member States on the wrong track by guiding them towards a series of proposals that is at odds with the desired concentration.
We could say that, in this state of affairs, we have once again missed the opportunity to really strengthen sustainable urban development by ring-fencing ever-increasing urbanisation and, hence the destruction of the countryside.
There has been no appropriate assessment of the importance of the global grant instrument, which could prove to be extremely useful in redressing the balance between urban and rural zones and, moreover, would accord proper status to local bodies which, being independent, could bring about the conditions for territorial development more quickly, and make a practical contribution to the efforts to reform the Structural Funds and to achieve the objectives of efficiency, concentration and administrative reform.
Rural areas must truly be seen as a resource which should be increasingly invested in, by encouraging young people to remain in rural areas in order to prevent their economic and social disintegration.
It is now a fact that in order to attain this goal, rural areas need to see the creation of new jobs, which are no longer solely connected with agriculture, in the traditional sense - although this sector is important for the protection of the environment and the preservation of biodiversity - but also, for instance, in rural tourism, sport and cultural activities, environmental projects, SMEs, services, and so on.
A genuine flaw in the guidelines are specific guidelines for the orchestration of coordination between the ESF and employment strategy. The fact that this coordination is being put into effect for the first time during the 2000-2006 programme period implies that the Member States really do need "guidelines".
I must also stress that once again the Commission is, in fact, skirting the issue of practical action on equal opportunities.
In conclusion, the document is not particularly satisfactory, and in some aspects is disappointing.
Berend Report (A5-0107/1999)
. (PT) We basically agree with the assessment and the thoughts put forward by the rapporteur concerning the sixth periodic report on the social and economic situation and development of the regions of the European Union.
We shall therefore confine ourselves to highlighting a few issues.
Firstly, and as the Commission itself states, it must be understood that the great improvement seen by some of the poorest regions in their per capita GDP between 1991 and 1996 was largely due to the inclusion of the new German LÀnder in calculating the Community average from 1991 onwards.
This obviously caused a slight reduction in the Union' s per capita GDP level.
We also feel that it is particularly important to state that the recovery seen in some regions - where it did actually take place - was accompanied only to a limited extent by growth in employment. This consequently imposes the need for new development strategies, with a considerably greater level of attention needing to be paid to this area.
This situation shows that it would be a mistake to leave adopting measures for promoting employment to the exclusive internal control of the Member States, which is what the report proposes.
Finally, but no less importantly, I would like to refer to the rapporteur' s proposal that, in future, this type of report should also include, amongst other issues, an analysis of the way cohesion is developing between the regions within each State.
The huge variety of situations and the varying development seen from region to region within the same State mean that there is a need for an in-depth assessment of this issue. This kind of assessment would enable us to allow and guarantee corrections to regional (and other) policies with a view also to guaranteeing internal cohesion within each Member State.
. (FR) Considering the employment situation in the Community and the European Union' s declared ambition to steadfastly attack unemployment, the analysis of mergers carried out by the Commission should take elements other than competition into consideration.
As an example I would give the restructuring of ABB Alsthom Power. A sizeable delegation of employees of this firm from throughout Europe is visiting Strasbourg today.
The management of ABB Alsthom Power, following a merger carried out in June 1999, announced restructuring where there is already the prospect of layoffs in a number of countries.
This damaging situation for employment raises many questions, particularly regarding the information given to the European Works Council, in existence since 1996.
It suggests that the Community directive on European Works Councils must be updated and strengthened.
It also requires the monitoring of mergers taking employment, the environment and consumers into consideration.
Since the report of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs did not go far enough in this respect, I abstained.
.
(PT) By proposing to apply the principle of subsidiarity in Community competition policy, the Commission is devolving to national authorities and courts the responsibility to take decisions and deal with abuses of dominant positions in relation to company agreements which create market distortion. Issues of mergers and state aid however, still remain within the notification system.
The position that has now been adopted aims to create more rapid ways of applying competition policy, moving towards applying Community law in national courts rather than at the European Court of Justice, and even aims at having specialised courts.
This partial renationalisation of competition policy could involve higher costs for Member States.
On the other hand, as the rapporteur points out, in the name of competition policy, public monopolies are often exchanged for private monopolies, with the privatisation of important industries and public companies, as has happened in Portugal, with harmful consequences for the country and its workers.
- (FR) The Commission' s White Paper on the modernisation of the rules implementing Articles 85 and 86 of the EC Treaty (now 81 and 82) certainly does not propose any "renationalisation" of competition policy, as some Members of the European Parliament fear.
But it does, at least, make it possible to anticipate some rather interesting options for development of the European Union.
In fact, taking note of the congestion of its services due to the prior notification system of state agreements likely to cause distortions in trade, and afraid of seeing the number of notifications increase yet further with the arrival of new Member States, the Commission is proposing to do away with the prior notification system of such agreements, and to apply competition rules at Member State level in a more decentralised fashion.
The most remarkable thing, in my view, is the message conveyed by this proposal: that the Commission is anticipating the consequences of enlargement and realising that this necessarily, and virtually automatically, requires reform of the centralised system.
Admittedly, this reform is one of increasing flexibility rather than dismantling.
Indeed, the White Paper envisages that the Commission will retain the supervision and central direction of the new system.
Moreover, the von Wogau report, which the European Parliament has just voted on, supports it in so doing.
But at the same time, one can clearly see that the upheaval caused by enlargement may lead to Community competences being limited and subsidiarity being extended.
It is a quite different Europe which is taking shape in the long term.
Is this not, indeed, what is so distressing to some Socialist Members of the European Parliament?
The German Social Democrats voted against the von Wogau report because, in their view, it might break up European policy on competition, which is to say, in plain terms, attacking the standardising superstate.
Curiously, a number of employers agreed with them, preferring the European "one-stop" system, which they consider to be more economical and more stable legally.
Indeed, this is one advantage of the present system.
But, on the other hand, the wider view must also be taken, namely that the initial decentralisation which has been begun today may, in the long term, lead to greater freedom to take the requirements of each country into account, and this will be of benefit to everyone.
Rapkay Report (A5-0078/1999)
The Members of Parliament from the Lutte OuvriÚre Party shall not be voting in favour of these reports on European competition policy.
Competition is a war which has major concerns fighting each other, which constantly takes the form of layoffs, factory closures, not to mention extensive waste of production capacity.
We see a further example of this with the planned layoffs in Europe proposed by the corporation ABB Alsthom Power.
Eighteen million unemployed and 50 million poor people within the European Union, despite its being one of the wealthiest regions in the world: these are the results of this competition which the European institutions intend to promote.
The Commission' s declared intention to regulate the conditions of competition on the European market is ridiculous, for the only law which competition respects is the law of the jungle where the most powerful squash or devour the weakest elements.
This is repulsive most of all in social terms.
The European Commission' s report is a blunt demonstration of the fact that the Union institutions have no interest in anything except the major capitalist corporations who are engaged in this economic warfare and have no interest in the victims this causes.
There is nothing to prevent the spread of unemployment, nothing to protect employees, nothing to prevent the major concerns driving part of the population into poverty simply to make their shareholders richer still!
We acknowledge that this report does have one good point - it shows that the working class majority in society can expect nothing from the European institutions in terms of safeguarding their living conditions, and still less of improving them.
- (FR) In voting against this report, we are acting as spokespersons for all the men and women who in Seattle and throughout Europe expressed their rejection of a world reduced to strict commercial logic.
We are voting against this report on behalf of the development of public services, in memory of the victims of the Paddington rail disaster, killed not by fate but by an absurd determination to have competition where there should instead be regulations.
This report is essentially a primitive text with no inspiration other than the law of the jungle, for it is not competition that can solve the problems facing humanity at this turn of the century.
Whether it is a matter of the balance of the biosphere, culture or cooperation with the third world, excessive competition is a factor increasing regression and insecurity.
Do you imagine that the 18 million unemployed people in Europe are victims of too reticent an application of this competition policy?
We are convinced that the opposite is true, and we do not think that state aid is by definition excessive.
Excessive in comparison with what iron rule, what criteria of efficiency?
Finally, after Seattle, do you really think you can advocate increasing the role of the WTO?
Only the legal advisers to multinationals could demonstrate such stubbornness.
Jonckheer Report (A5-0087/1999)
I am pleased to see the quality of the seventh report on state aid within the EU, and to see that it will henceforth be an annual report, and also that the Directorate-General for Competition will be making information, both general and specific, publicly accessible via its website.
I am happy with the rapporteur' s treatment of state aid and I congratulate him on this.
There is too often a tendency to criticise state aid harshly as a measure causing distortion in competition.
Admittedly, an effective competition policy is a prerequisite for the proper operation of the internal market and of economic and monetary union.
However, as the rapporteur pointed out, such aid is occasionally essential and may, in addition to enabling the survival of a specific firm, make it possible to contribute to sustainable development (Article 6 of the Treaty), services of general economic interest (Article 16) and economic and social cohesion (Article 158).
Clearly though, it must be monitored, a task which falls to the European Commission.
The aid which Union Member States allocate each year to the sectors under consideration reached a total of EUR 95 billion in the period 1995-1997, including 40% allocated to the manufacturing sector.
This aid is considerably less than the previous period, 1993-1995 (a 13% drop in the total amount and a drop from 3.8% to 2.6% in the amount of aid to the manufacturing sector).
This downturn in aid is chiefly due to the reduction in aid granted to the new German LÀnder.
Like the rapporteur, I deplore the fact that the figures given in the report do not cover all state aid.
The European Commission must make good these omissions as soon as possible.
It must also cooperate with the Member States in order to improve the quality of data in good time, which is to say in time for the ninth report.
I think it would be a good idea if the Commission published a register specifying the amount of state aid per Member State.
I also deplore the fact that the European Parliament has been totally excluded from the Advisory Committee on State Aid.
In order to compensate for this situation, the European Commission should be obliged to make regular reports to us.
I shall conclude with one aspect of the use of state aid which I feel is particularly dangerous: the matter of aid resulting in businesses relocating from one Member State to another, with the risk of subsidy hunting which makes no contribution to the shared objectives of the EU.
This is why I should like to see the next report on state aid include some assessment of the effect of such aid on employment, industry and craft businesses in the beneficiary countries.
Langen Report (A5-0073/1999)
In the important debate on competition this morning, I expressed my views on Mr Langen' s report on the implementation in 1998 of the sixth Steel Aid Code.
Just as the Court of Justice recognised in its order of 3 May 1996, the iron and steel industry is particularly sensitive to disturbances to its competitive operation.
Establishing a system of aids to this sector intended to ensure the survival of successful firms was therefore justifiable, even though Article 4(c), of the ECSC Treaty prohibited any sort of state aid to the steel industry.
This, indeed, is the purpose of the sixth Steel Aid Code.
At the same time, it is, of course, essential to avoid any disturbance of competition conditions or of the markets, hence the importance of regulating such aid.
It is therefore essential to continue to restrict state aid to research and development, environmental protection and aid granted in the event of plant closure.
In the same way, it is vital for Member States to fulfil their obligation to report to the Commission on the aid granted to their steel undertakings, as stipulated under Article 7 of the Steel Aid Code.
The Commission suggests that Member States submit their reports within a time limit of two months following the end of each six-month period or, at least, annually, without the need for reminders.
Like the rapporteur, I am pleased with the Commission report, but I did deplore the fact that the report did not cover every aspect of the aid.
Although the Steel Aid Code is expressed in a very clear way, the Commission has, on a number of occasions, authorised aid for the steel industry even though such aid did not fall within the categories set out in the code.
In the interests of equality, there are grounds to either apply the Steel Aid Code strictly or modify the Code if the Commission wishes to authorise types of aid other than those legally acceptable at the moment.
Finally, we have the problem of the consequences of the expiry of the ECSC Treaty.
The aid system must effectively be continued beyond 2002.
My feeling in this respect is that only a Council Regulation can provide the necessary legal certainty and ensure an official ban on any aid not covered by the code.
For all these reasons I voted in favour of the Langen report, and I now await the Commission' s response to our requests and demands.
(The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m.)
