I want to emphasise that, as early as 1997, the Commission proposed a special clause concerning manufacturer' s liability and that the Commission entirely supports the common position.
This does not impose disproportionate costs upon manufacturers. Far from it.
Amendments Nos 39, 40, 46 and 47 concern quantified objectives.
The high level of protection aimed at by the common position would be very much undermined if the recycling objective for the year 2006 were removed.
These amendments would also make the objectives awkward to deal with and difficult to supervise.
Allow me also - listen carefully to what I am saying now, because I have heard this reiterated in the debate - allow me to comment on the issue of vintage and "cherished" cars as mentioned in Amendments Nos 3, 7, and 9, section 2, and 35.
Such vehicles are not covered by the definition of waste and are not therefore included under the directive.
So, whatever has been stated in this regard, vintage cars and motorcycles are not included under the directive.
We do not consider that Amendments Nos 2 and 14 add anything to the directive.
Amendment No 23 involves the Commission' s having to adopt quality standards for reusable components.
This is not covered by the directive.
An ad hoc directive should therefore be demanded from the European Parliament and the Council.
Amendments Nos 29, 31 and 41 water down the requirements concerning the dismantling of vehicles.
There is a danger of Amendments Nos 31 and 41 reducing the chances of recycling plastic, tyres and glass.
Finally, the Commission cannot approve Amendments Nos 1 and 33 for reasons to do with legal clarity; nor Amendment No 19, which the Commission considers to be unnecessary at this stage.
Furthermore, Amendment No 43 does not fall within the directive' s area of applicability.
Thank you very much, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
We shall now proceed to the vote.
Vote
Madam President, as you know, the reason we are voting this report today rather than last week is because of the numerous and serious translation errors, particularly in the French version.
You have received a letter of complaint from me about the number of mistakes in this report and in other reports with which I have had dealings recently.
There is an error which has still not been corrected and that is on Amendment No 4.
In the English version we refer to pharmaceutical and scientific organisations.
In the French version that becomes 'entreprises pharmaceutiques et organisations scientifiques' .
Could you please make sure that French-speaking Members of this House know that the word entreprises is not correct.
It should not be in the amendment.
And, again, I urge you, Madam President, to look at the standard of translation that we are receiving currently.
Madame McNally, in general, I am myself rather concerned at the increasing number of problems we are having with the translations.
I shall consult the parliamentary services to see how we can find a solution.
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0011/2000) by Mr Langen, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision adopting a multiannual programme for the promotion of renewable energy sources in the Community - Altener (C5-0333/1999 - 1997/0370(COD))
(Parliament approved the joint text)
Report (A5-0010/2000) by Mrs Ahern, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European and Council decision adopting a multiannual programme for the promotion of energy efficiency - SAVE (C5-0334/1999 - 1997/0371(COD))
(Parliament approved the joint text)
Report (A5-0009/2000) by Mr Graça Moura, on behalf of the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee, on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council decision establishing a single financing and programming instrument for cultural cooperation ('Culture 2000') (C5-0327/1999 - 1998/0169(COD))
(Parliament approved the joint text)
Recommendation for second reading (A5-0006/2000), on behalf of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on end-of-life vehicles (8095/1/1999 - C5-0180/1999 - 1997/0194(COD)) (Rapporteur: Mr Florenz)
(The President declared the common position approved as amended)
Report (A5-0007/2000) by Mr Berger, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the posting of workers who are third-country nationals for the provision of cross-border services (COM(1999)0003 - C5-0095/1999 - 1999/0012(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0012/2000) by Mr Berger, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on the proposal for a Council directive extending the freedom to provide cross-border services to third-country nationals established within the Community (COM(99)0003 - C5-0050/2000 - 1999/0013(CNS))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0003/2000) by Mr Marinho, on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market, on
I. the draft Council decision amending Decision 88/591/ECSC, EEC, Euratom establishing a Court of First Instance of the European Communities (5713/1999 - C5-0020/1999 - 1999/0803(CNS))
and
II. the draft Council decision amending Decision 88/591/ECSC, EEC, Euratom establishing a Court of First Instance of the European Communities (9614/1999 - C5-0167/1999 - 1999/0805(CNS))
(In successive votes, Parliament adopted both legislative resolutions)
Report (A5-0022/2000) by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the proposal for a Council decision providing exceptional Community financial assistance to Kosovo (COM(99)0598 - C5-0045/2000 - 1999/0240(CNS))
Madam President, I would simply like to point out that during the procedure, we were not allowed either to table or, consequently, adopt amendments in the Committee.
I do not know whether this is in order, and I would therefore ask you to verify the accuracy of the procedure which was followed before this report reached the House.
I have taken note of your comment, Mr Speroni.
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0018/2000) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the convening of the Intergovernmental Conference (14094/1999 - C5-0341/1999 - 1999/0825(CNS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Joint motion for a resolution on the negotiations to form a government in Austria
Madam President, we simply have a few translation problems in this area too.
We consider the English version to be the original text.
To give you an example, in both paragraphs 4 and 5 of the Dutch and German versions, the equivalents of the English words: "in so far as" have been omitted.
This is why I would ask you to consider the English version as the original version.
Thank you, Mr van Velzen.
In response I shall say the same thing I said to Mrs McNally just now.
I am very concerned about these translation problems which, unfortunately, we seem to be having increasingly, and I can assure you that we shall look into the matter very seriously indeed.
In any case, the authoritative version is always, of course, the original language version.
Madam President, the Socialist Group proposes the following oral amendment.
I shall read it in English, which is the original language of the resolution.
"Condemns Mr Haider for his insults towards certain EU Member States and their leaders in the last few days in statements, which Foreign Minister SchÌssel has failed to condemn."
(More than twelve Members of Parliament rise to their feet) (Parliament adopted the resolution)
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
McNally Report (A5-0082/1999)
- (FR) I am pleased to see the excellent report on the communication from the Commission entitled 'Women and Science' .
In this document, the Commission proposes to stimulate debate with a view to promoting the increased participation of women in research in Europe.
This objective deserves our total support.
Expenditure on research and technology actually forms a sizeable part of the budget of the European Union, after agriculture and the Structural Funds.
The various framework programmes have enabled not only high quality scientific work to take place but also innovative cooperation between researchers in various Member States.
Relatively few women, however, are active in scientific disciplines despite the excellent results they achieve in their studies.
It is unacceptable for women to continue to be underrepresented.
I am therefore delighted to see the proposals of the European Commission.
The Commission document sets out to focus on the initiatives to be taken at Community level, especially through the fifth framework programme for research and technical development, which is quite obviously something I approve of.
The goal for the years to come is to increase women' s participation to achieve a rate of 40% female participation in the Marie Curie grants, in consultative assemblies and in evaluation panels for the whole of the fifth framework programme for research and technical development.
In order to do so, it will be necessary to improve discussion and the sharing of experience among the various Member States, to set up a coordinating body to implement a 'Women and Science' monitoring system within the fifth framework programme for research and technical development, specially responsible for gathering and disseminating statistics collected in the implementation of the framework programme for research and technical development regarding the rate of women' s participation in research activities.
Furthermore, like the rapporteur, I think that studies must be undertaken to analyse the reasons for the gap between the number of women with science degrees and the number of women who manage to have a career in these fields.
Improved analysis of the obstacles facing women will make it possible to develop a strategy to eliminate those obstacles.
We will have to enlist the support of the many existing networks of women scientists and to obtain their assistance in framing a joint research policy.
The European Parliament will continue to carefully monitor the implementation of the fifth framework programme for research and technical development as regards the promotion of women and to come up with ideas for the course of the fifth framework programme for research and technical development.
We must incorporate the gender factor in science, research and all other European Union policies, in order to put an end to the structural discrimination which prevents women competing on equal terms in the labour market.
In its communication "Women and Science" , the European Commission informs us of its good intentions of enlisting the support of women to enrich research in Europe.
This is very good, and we are pleased to see it.
The fact is there are too few women involved in research work in the European Union.
We know that we can change this situation, in which women are underrepresented in the science sector, only by means of a policy of educational guidance which will systematically encourage a greater range of career choices for girls and, when they have obtained their degrees, by means of positive measures at the professional level.
Having said this, some of our fellow Members clearly have qualms because the report by the Committee on Women' s Rights and Equal Opportunities which we have voted on contains one point which may lead to confusion and is interpreted by some as a quota stipulating that there must be 40% female participating in research in Europe.
This is patently not the case, since such a quota would not be realistic.
Indeed the report does not mention the time limit for this quota to be achieved.
To set my fellow Members' minds at ease and to reassure them, I have tabled an amendment to the resolution in which we simply take note of the fact that the Commission, in its communication, undertakes to make significant efforts to increase women' s participation in Community research programmes, which is, after all, a praiseworthy goal.
And why should we not note that the Commission' s communication stipulates specifically that it considers a 40% minimum level to be a crucial goal for women' s participation at all levels in the implementation and management of research programmes?
It is not a quota!
It is a perfectly legitimate declaration of intent from the Commission, insofar as it concerns its own programmes and not those of Member States.
The latter would be well advised, however, to follow the good example of the Commission, for once, and make the same efforts in their own research programmes.
People must realise this!
I am pleased to see that the debate on Mrs McNally' s report with a view to increasing and facilitating women' s participation in professions in research and science, met with a fairly wide consensus.
On this subject, any improvement in bringing the concept of equal opportunities to bear in everyday reality is indeed desirable, and I can only welcome the implementation of a policy which would contribute towards satisfying the legitimate aspirations of women: to enjoy equal access to scientific study, to obtain positions of responsibility truly in line with their results and competence, and to have accompanying measures drawn up rapidly, enabling them to reconcile their family life and their career.
This necessary realistic and pragmatic policy, however, which will have to be associated with the elimination of the practical obstacles identified as unquestionable factors in this inequality must, as far as we are concerned, necessarily be based on the idea of complementarity, which is the only one capable of justifying a proactive policy on the subject.
Our thinking and our future actions must focus on respecting these values, which truly respect gender differences, not on some postulated sexual equality, which has its own intrinsic contradictions. In any event there are no grounds for resorting to the easy option of a quantitative policy, based on the use of quotas, contrary to the idea of citizenship which the Members of Parliament in the UEN Group set great store by, and whose probable consequences would be the opposite of the effect apparently sought by Mrs McNally' s report, namely women' s participation in careers in science and research in proportion with their merit.
By having the opportunity to show their true merit, by eliminating as far as possible the barriers associated to the specifics of their condition as women, and not in the context of a conflict in which women seem to be attacking male privilege, women will demonstrate the benefits to be gained by facilitating a situation where their professional careers may flourish. In this way they will succeed in altering balances which are still not in their favour.
Since the European Parliament chose to vote on a text that expressly resorted to the quota policy which my report for an opinion had attempted to denounce in no uncertain terms, and in spite of the general approach which I approve for the most part, I can do no other than abstain from the vote on Mrs McNally' s report.
Second reading of the Florenz report (A5-0006/2000)
Madam President, today in the second reading we have voted on the amendments to the Directive on end-of-life vehicles.
I have rejected the entire directive, not least because Amendment No 34 to Article 12 and the amendments to Article 5/4 have not received an adequate majority here in the House.
I come from a country which manufactures 50% of the cars in the EU and it is precisely the free collection of end-of-life cars which is so financially onerous and unacceptable.
Here, in my opinion, the labour market is also considerably burdened by the costs arising to these companies.
This cannot be a good thing in a European Union where we are ever mindful of employment.
I consider that this is a serious defect and that, in principle, it does not befit our legal system.
In my opinion, this directive is unacceptable for this reason.
Madam President, I would like to comment on the Florenz report.
I think that the vote has shown that although the common position of the Council has been toned down, the major groups here (and above all the German delegates of the major groups) have not, thank God, succeeded in destroying the heart of the directive, namely manufacturer responsibility.
Unfortunately, there has been a toning down of the effective ecological material flow policy, i.e. through the obligatory risk assessment of materials whose harmful effect on health has been known for years.
We know that lead, mercury, cadmium and hexavalent chromium present high toxic and health risks and numerous Community directives have succeeded in restricting their usage without any risk assessment being made.
Here, unfortunately, the European Parliament has bowed to the interests of industry.
I am nevertheless extremely pleased that there was no majority for the amendments of Florenz, Lange and others who have actually sought to lever out manufacturer responsibility and make consumers solely responsible for the cost of environmentally compatible disposal of end-of-life vehicles.
I found this to be an extremely shameful attempt and I am pleased that it failed, that the attempt by one large government and the delegates of a large Member State did not gain a majority, by which I mean the attempt to dominate the voting process of the European Parliament on grounds of the interests of its national industries.
Madam President, although I too have spent most of my life in fast cars, I agree with my colleague, Mr Florenz, that the directive on scrapping cars must make it clear that vintage cars are not included.
These splendid cars do not constitute waste.
That is why I voted in favour of the amendments.
Neither can we fix what the age for a vintage car should be as there are very great differences from one country' s statutes to another' s.
In this way vehicles of historic value can be preserved for future generations.
We cannot forget old car enthusiasts either, of whom there are more than 50 000 in Finland alone.
They are involved in low-profile work of valuable cultural importance.
- (SV) The parliamentary process concerning this question has been confusing, to say the least.
Before the vote at the plenary sitting, new amendments have been tabled such as have already been voted down by the Committee.
In the divided situation which has now arisen, we therefore consider that the Council' s wordings are the best.
We need a directive in this area, and we also therefore want to avoid a complicated conciliation procedure.
The directive concerning end-of-life vehicles will stand as an example for future legislation.
It is therefore important that the manufacturer' s liability should be clear. This should not in any way be jeopardised.
Today, Parliament is examining, for the last time, this text on 'end-of-life' vehicles and what is to be done with them: their destruction, a commendable intention with regard to our environment.
There are, however, two considerations which must certainly be dealt with within this text.
First of all, who is to bear the financial costs of this destruction?
We must all ensure that it is not always the same person, i.e. the vehicle owner, who pays.
He or she already pays enough in taxes for this vehicle, which is a bottomless pit in financial terms.
We have recently had cause to talk about the 'polluter pays' principle. We should apply this principle rationally and calmly, correctly targeted and without ideology.
Another essential point that must be included in this text is the express exclusion of vintage vehicles from its scope.
One might make the claim that there is no need to state it explicitly in writing because it is an obvious point, but I feel that it is a point that should be made in writing because there is every interest in adopting clear texts.
So let us vote for these amendments in order to preserve these gems of the automobile industry.
These old vehicles are testimony to a culture and a passion which should be recognised and respected by Europe, if we are not to water down each of our specific identities.
There is no lack of examples amongst European texts, and we all know how much debate and argument is caused by a lack of clarity and precision.
I only need to mention the case of Directives 79/409 and 92/43.
The precise wording of texts provides a guarantee and legal certainty for those people who will have to apply or live by these texts on a daily basis.
It is not the job of the MEP to generate litigation or legal proceedings for judges in any arena. That would not be fulfilling our mission.
On the contrary, we must adopt crystal-clear texts in order to limit legal disputes.
.
(NL) That the Florenz report has caused such a stir has been proven by the powerful lobby machine which has been set in motion by both industry and the environmental movement.
