On the other hand, the decision to delay the second round of talks, initiated in Shepherdstown by the Syrian Arab Republic, is undoubtedly significant, but I am convinced that the hopes which were raised on 3 January in that town will not be dashed.
Mr President, the fact that the different groups in this Parliament are tabling a motion for a resolution, in this ever controversial debate, which is the result of a broad consensus, seems to me to demonstrate the clear political will to decisively support open peace processes.
I would therefore like, equally firmly, to express our rejection of the use of violence to resolve differences, which are still no doubt profound, between the parties.
In my judgement, this constitutes a guarantee to both sides, both from a political and a financial point of view, of the commitment they can expect from the European Union in terms of its contribution to the cost of the peace which we all long for.
It is clear to everyone that this is essential to guaranteeing security in the area and to cooperating in the development which is needed to heal the serious social differences which exist.
But this also serves to make a claim, on the part of the European Union, for a degree of political participation in the process which is consistent with its economic contribution - we do not have aspirations to be bankers - and which will be suitably visible to the public.
There is absolutely no doubt that the forthcoming trip by the President of the European Parliament to the region will contribute to this.
Mr President, I want to thank Commissioner Patten for his detailed account.
I should like to say that I agree with the tone which Galeote Quecedo' s speech set here.
We in Parliament strongly support the Middle East peace process.
It is, of course, a peace process which is finally under way.
If we think of how the process was looking a year ago, the difference between then and now is like that between night and day, despite difficulties and delays.
I want to emphasise four points.
First of all, the Sharm el-Sheikh Agreement contains, as everyone knows, a concrete timetable for the implementation of Israel' s commitments. This applies both to the interim agreement and to the Hebron and Wye Agreements.
While the negotiations on the final peace settlement have begun, I think it is important to keep the two processes apart.
A lack of progress in the final status negotiations should not jeopardise implementation of the three above-mentioned interim agreements.
What we need to look out for in this context is how matters develop in connection with the harbours in Gaza, the northern transit route between Gaza and the West Bank, further releases of political prisoners and implementation of the financial commitments.
The second point relates to Syria.
There, the border question is obviously central.
How negotiations are proceeding there, we still do not know.
What is important, however, is that they have begun.
An important question in this context is the future distribution of water.
As things are at present, the Golan Heights account for between a third and a sixth of Israel's water supply.
The third aspect is the peace negotiations in Syria which are closely linked to the issue of Israeli withdrawal from Southern Lebanon.
According to UNIFIL, there are now concrete signs that Israel is preparing to withdraw, which is something we welcome.
There too, of course, outstanding matters in dispute are the water problem and the situation of the Lebanese Palestinian refugees.
My last point concerns the future Palestinian State.
This may be proclaimed in the course of this year, with or without Israel' s support.
The Barak government has given to understand that it intends to conclude a peace agreement with a state as the other party.
Even if negotiations are not completed by September of this year, there is nothing in the relevant treaties to prevent a Palestinian state from being proclaimed after that date.
In this context, it is important for those of us who support the idea of a Palestinian state that the latter should be as Commissioner Patten said, namely a state subject to public control, and that it should be a democratic state.
This is something to which we all want to contribute.
Mr President, I would like to refer, firstly and above all, to the joint resolution which will be laid down to round off this debate. My Group has made a contribution to this resolution and, needless to say, approves of it.
More specifically, however, I would like to express our delight at the fact that, after such a long time, Israel and Syria are on speaking terms again to resolve their differences of opinion.
The recent negotiations are already an important step towards a permanent peace in the Middle East.
It is, therefore, regrettable that these peace talks have been suspended for the time being.
Indeed, both parties will need to make huge efforts.
Lasting peace in the region can only be achieved by means of an agreement which guarantees the security of the Israeli borders, as well as Syria' s integrity.
It is also necessary to initiate permanent diplomatic relations and to establish constant dialogue.
In addition to the bilateral meetings with Syria, I hope that Israel will also enter into negotiations with Lebanon within the foreseeable future and that, in the framework of economic and regional cooperation, a multilateral approach will appear possible.
Nevertheless, it is still regrettable that the European Union, one of the most important financial donors, is still unable to play a major political role in the peace process.
This peace process in the Middle East is one of the priorities of the European Union' s common foreign and security policy.
This is where Mr Solana, the High Representative to the Council, could come into his own.
The Commission and Member States also have to be encouraged to support projects which can help develop understanding and partnership between the different nations in the region.
I should also draw your attention to the significance of the Barcelona process which should have a beneficial impact on regional cooperation.
In this respect, we support Libya' s participation, provided that it recognises human rights, renounces support for terrorists and fully supports the peace process.
There are still, needless to say, many unresolved problems and unanswered questions, also involving the Palestinians.
Everyone knows that the peace process is a protracted and difficult affair but we are convinced that, with the necessary trust, perseverance and indispensable political will, our common goal, namely a peaceful and prosperous Middle East, will be achieved.
Mr President, it is pleasing that, despite certain delays and problems, the peace negotiations are going on both between Israel and Palestine and between Israel and Syria.
The moment of truth is approaching.
Is Israel prepared to comply with the UN' s resolutions and, in exchange for peace and security, hand back the Arab areas which were conquered in 1967?
Will Israel let Palestinian refugees return or be given compensation?
Will Israel share Jerusalem and the water of the River Jordan?
Will a free Palestine be a truly democratic state and, therefore, reliable as a partner in peace?
Will Syria fully accept Israel' s existence and introduce democracy and the rule of law?
The fact that the main responsibility for the peace process lies with the occupying country, Israel, does not prevent the Arab partners from also having a considerable share of the responsibility.
Peace in the Middle East concerns us all, however.
It is therefore good that the EU should act as a godparent to the Palestinian state.
Against this background, I want to conclude with a remarkable story from Sweden where an international Intergovernmental Conference on Hitler' s extermination of the Jews is being held, which is obviously a welcome initiative.
Of 47 states invited from all corners of the world, not one of them, however, is an Arab state included in the EU' s Barcelona process.
This has been interpreted as indicating that the Arab attitude towards Israel should be regarded by Europeans as being similar to the Nazis' anti-Semitism, which of course is completely incorrect.
The Arab world' s criticism of Israel has been founded upon the same sort of anti-colonialism as, for example, Algeria' s fight for freedom against France.
But today, Egypt, Jordan and Palestine have peace treaties with Israel.
I therefore wonder whether Commissioner Patten does not agree with me that it would have been only right and proper to have invited at least one Arab state to the holocaust conference in Stockholm.
Mr President, I would like to thank Commissioner Patten very much for the awareness he has demonstrated of the difficulties inherent in the peace process and the challenge that the European Union is taking on to bring it to completion.
It is high time there was peace in the Middle East.
It is time to end the era which began with the Balfour declaration in 1917 and the Arab-Israeli war of 1948. It is time there were secure borders and political, social and economic rights in every country in this region, and that human rights were recognised and upheld in Syria, Palestine, Israel and everywhere else.
This is an exercise in sovereignty, and in democracy for each population and every individual, but to this end it is vital for all parties in the conflict to have the courage to strive for peace and rights, and to recognise the other as its partner and not as its subject to whom concessions must be given.
I refer principally to the Palestine-Israel question, but the same also applies to the territories which have been occupied in the Golan since 1967 and in southern Lebanon since 1982.
Israel has to accept its responsibilities, withdraw from the occupied territories and share its water resources but, at the same time, it has to be sure that it will be safe and able to live in peace in terms of economic and political relations with all the countries in the area.
However, Israel is not the only country concerned with security.
The same goes for the other countries, especially for the Palestinians, who are still living under military occupation and whose land even today is still confiscated in areas B and C, despite the Oslo Agreement and subsequent agreements. Between the period when the Oslo Agreement was signed and 17 October 1999, 174 000 dunams of land were confiscated, 8 462 of which have been taken under Mr Barak' s Government.
Trees have been uprooted, houses are still being demolished and, above all, water supplies have been reduced or refused, especially in East Jerusalem, while the settlements continue and are growing constantly.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that with the election of the new government, positive steps have been taken: negotiations, at least, have resumed. But in the Middle East, there can be no stable and lasting peace if the Palestinians do not have their own state, if they cannot move freely within their own territory.
All the international community has to do is implement Resolutions 332, 248, 245 and 194.
We are concerned by the deferment of the building of relations with Syria, as well as Mr Barak' s decision to postpone the withdrawal of the Israeli army and the Sharm el­-Sheikh agreements.
We feel it is extremely important for the European Union to play a political role in negotiations which matches its economic aid.
We cannot be content with a role backstage. We must be leading protagonists while staying off a collision course with the United States, as Minister Gama said.
Mr President, firstly my thanks and appreciation to Commissioner Patten for his comments here today, particularly in relation to the role of the European Union in the peace process, and for reaffirming that our role is not only that of "banker" for the entire operation.
I was deeply disappointed at the news this week that the peace talks between Israel and Syria had been suspended.
I very much hope that a compromise can be reached to overcome this so that the peace negotiations can be resumed at a very early date.
Nevertheless, we cannot deny that some positive political progress has been made in the Middle East of late.
The fact that the Syrian Foreign Minister and the Israeli Prime Minister were recently sitting around the same table in America for the first time in their respective histories is an indication that old hatreds and animosities can be overcome.
Political leaders must show real courage to put in place a framework which can lead to an overall peace settlement within the Middle East.
I know that if agreement can be reached between Syria and Israel, the Israeli Prime Minister will still face real opposition to any new agreement with Syria in any future referendum.
The settlers at the Golan Heights will demand to be compensated and there will have to be guarantees of security.
If Syria would be willing to offer concessions on the security question then the prospects of a successful resolution to the Israel/Syria question might be promising.
On the issue of Palestine, I recognise that there are still some difficulties with regard to the implementation of some aspects of the Wye Agreement.
The key problem areas at the moment include the difficulties of redeployment, as well as the transfer of territories.
The low level of releases of Palestinian prisoners and the fact that the Israeli Government appears to intend halting implementation of building permits already granted, as well as not approving new ones, pose further obstacles.
These issues have clearly been holding up progress on the permanent status negotiations, although, I believe, these talks will not be held up indefinitely.
At present, the main difficulty in approaching the negotiations seems to be that the Palestinians are insisting that the border issue must be agreed upon first, while the Israeli Government says that it should be settled only if a solution is reached on the issue of settlements and security.
Currently, both sides seem to have accepted that nothing will be agreed until everything is agreed.
In conclusion, while other countries in the Middle East have had reservations about the overall direction of the peace process, now that the Syrian Government has been brought into the peace process, Egypt and other countries in the region are willing to move forward.
I sincerely hope that, in the interests of improving the safety and quality of life of the people living in the Middle East, all the key protagonists will move forward quickly, in the very near future, so as to reach an overall agreement on all the key matters which need to be resolved.
Mr President, the various motions for resolutions tabled in Parliament more or less represent the situation in the Middle East.
There are those who are in favour of new agreements between Israel and Syria, but only a few focus on the real problem at the heart of the Middle East issue.
Indeed, the time has come to resolve a central problem for global stability.
The time has come for Israel to fulfil its promises of old and definitively withdraw from the occupied territories, at last recognising once and for all the authority of Palestine, whose resumed diplomatic activity will have a secure future while it is under the wise leadership of Yasser Arafat.
It is equally important not to lose sight of the Iraq question, which no one discusses anymore, thereby relegating the problems of millions of women, elderly people and children, the victims of an embargo as arrogant as it is wicked, to oblivion.
I do not know what Syria and Israel will want or be able to do in reality, but I do know that our institution can do a lot and it is time that it attached the same importance to peoples' lives as it does to the ballasts of the cold, colourless, artificial neon bulbs in our lamps, which can illuminate houses but not the world in the third millennium.
Mr President, the Israeli author, Amos Oz, managed to capture very aptly the icy atmosphere at the negotiating table between the Israelis and Syrians recently.
He was under the impression that the Syrians thought that, in exchange for the Golan Heights, all they had to do was to fax the Israelis a receipt.
Oz' s impression is also echoed in the Israeli press.
It contrasts Prime Minister Barak' s personal peace efforts and the distant attitude, even physical absence, of the strong man of Damascus, President Assad, at the negotiations in the United States.
Surely Assad would be Barak' s ideal negotiating partner and not the Foreign Affairs Minister.
And the Israelis were certainly not impressed by the discourteous behaviour of Minister Farouk al-Shara in Shepherdstown.
His behaviour towards Prime Minister Ehud Barak was plainly insulting.
But why pay attention to such detail as basic diplomatic niceties in the face of a tough negotiation process over territory?
Well, the Syrians are quite possibly cutting off their nose to spite their face.
At the end of the day, Israeli voters can still express an opinion on the return of the Golan.
All the resolutions submitted express the sincere wish for greater European involvement in the peace process.
It is, however, very much in doubt whether Brussels can make available the billions of dollars which the Israeli and Syrian authorities require from their peace patron, the United States, not to mention the heavy, equally costly, security guarantees in case of an Israeli withdrawal from the Golan.
I would like to finish off by asking the European Council and Commission a question.
How accurate are the press reports which state that the Portuguese Presidency has already pledged troops as a peacekeeping force in the Golan?
Mr President, the truth is that the news of the indefinite suspension or delay of the talks between Syria and Israel is not good news, but nor is it good news that the day before yesterday there was another bomb attack which injured 16 people.
It is clear that, for once, the United States has not been able to secure progress on the restarting of these negotiations, and it is true that the obstacles are difficult to overcome: the Syrians wish to regain sovereignty and jurisdiction over the Golan Heights and re-establish the borders which existed before 4 June 1967, while the Israelis wish, since they consider that it suits their situation better, to have the borders which were set in 1923.
The suspension of the talks between Syria and Israel is not the only delay affecting the peace process in the Middle East.
The application of the framework agreement between the Palestinian authorities and Israel is also suspended at the moment.
After the talks which took place the day before yesterday between the Israeli Prime Minister and the Leader of the Palestinian Authority, the Israeli Prime Minister requested a delay of two months as from 13 February, the deadline for the implementation of the framework agreement on the situation in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
What can the European Union do in these circumstances?
Unfortunately, very little.
It naturally has to support these negotiations, sponsored by the United States; contacts have to be increased; the presence of the European Union envoy, Ambassador Moratinos, who has fulfilled his mission with great diligence and efficiency, within the powers of the European Union, is positive.
But none of this hides the fact that there is a certain sense of impotence, because when the negotiators from each side fly back to the United States this weekend, we will have to remember that, for every 100 dollars spent on the peace process in the region, 60 are contributed by the European Union.
When we consider that a conference will soon be held in Moscow, it becomes clear that the European Union' s presence in this peace process is somewhat pitiful.
I would like to insist to the Portuguese Presidency that we must play a greater role, that it is time to take over and to secure greater participation for the European Union in this process.
I hope that the forthcoming visit by the President of the European Parliament to the region, as well as the presidents of the relevant interparliamentary delegations, will begin an era of greater initiative and a greater presence for the European Union in this complicated and difficult peace process.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner Patten, I should like to thank you for your statements, especially Commissioner Patten, whose analysis I fully share and I shall not, therefore, repeat any of his ideas.
I should just like to make three comments which Commissioner Patten will perhaps see as similar but which, for various reasons, a Member can formulate more openly.
First, I believe that we can welcome the agreement between Israel and the Palestinian authorities.
But we have enough agreements now: Oslo, Wye Plantation, Sharm el-Sheikh.
We have enough agreements; they just need to be implemented.
However, in this regard I share Mr Salafranca' s scepticism when he says that there has been bad news from Israel this week, namely that the Sharm el-Sheikh Memorandum cannot be implemented within the set timeframe.
My second point concerns the resumption of negotiations between Syria and Israel.
I consider this to be very encouraging news.
But we have also learned this week that Mr Barak will not be travelling to Washington and that the negotiations cannot therefore be continued.
I should like to make it quite clear: if the Golan Heights are returned to Syria, the problem in this region will be solved.
On the question of the referendum which various Members have referred to: we must consider if a referendum always needs to be held in order to honour obligations under international law and under the law of nations.
In Germany, there would probably be dancing in the streets if we were to say that we were holding a referendum on payments to the European Union and we shall pay if the German people are prepared to pay.
That would be a similar situation.
My third and last point concerns the role of the European Union.
I should really like to stress the excellent role which Mr Moratinos' special mission has played in the region and the funding which we have provided there, Commissioner Patten.
You know that you will always have our support here in Parliament, and that includes your proposal, and we shall be behind you when the time comes to finance it.
But we must also play a political role and Mr Moratinos cannot play that role in this region on his own; the Presidency of the Council must take action, the EU High Representative for common foreign and security policy must travel to the region and we must do as the Russians did and invite the protagonists of the peace process ourselves.
Then we will have played the role which is commensurate with our participation and our contribution.
Mr President, Commissioner Patten, the recent peace talks begun in the USA between Israel and Syria mark a turning point in the history of the Middle East. It has taken fifty years to reach this point, which will involve some particularly difficult negotiations.
There will be no meeting today in Shepherdstown but we must hope, as Mr Patten said just now, that this postponement of the negotiations due to Syrian requirements will only represent one more step on the road to a peace agreement which will change the face of the Middle East.
This hope is contained in our motion for a resolution. We hope for a fair and balanced agreement based on respect for sovereignties and the right to live securely within safe and recognised borders.
All the foreign troops, including therefore the Syrian forces, must withdraw from Lebanon in accordance with Resolution 520 of the United Nations Security Council.
Dare we hope for an Israeli withdrawal from South Lebanon by July 2000, the date promised by Ehud Barak?
