Mr President, in the course of the last few years there has been a succession of serious tanker disasters world-wide and the countermeasures taken have either been ineffective or not worth mentioning.
It is particularly bad this time, not least because it has affected a major European State; an incident which could happen again at any time.
We urgently require a directive if we are to reduce these risks. The 15 clearly do not suffice.
These guarantee - making no claim to be exhaustive - a minimum of 3 things.
No tanker or freighter fit only for the scrap heap must ever put into any harbour within the European Union again. All those involved, including the transport agent, are responsible for any ensuing damage, and these individuals are to provide satisfactory assurances.
This is the only way of affording the victims the opportunity to make their claims for compensation.
However, we must aim higher in the long-term, let there be no mistake about that.
In other words, we need real cost-effectiveness for our entire energy supply system.
Mr President, may I start by saying that I would like to thank Commissioner Palacio very much for her clear, adequate and, at the same time, very firm response.
Many thanks for this.
This also means that, in any case, I have a great deal of respect for the briefing note which she sent on 10 January but also for the action points which she announced today.
The Erika disaster shows that when sound traffic and transport regulations are lacking at international and European level, nature and the environment come off second-best.
The damage suffered, also in ecological terms, cannot be expressed in money.
Hence also this joint debate involving transport and environmental management Members.
During the Christmas break, when the Dutch media received attention for the Erika disaster, I had a look, just out of interest, on the Internet to see what arrangements were, in fact, already in place for the purpose of taking relevant measures, especially after Premier Jospin had said that Europe should do more.
What I learned is that, actually, there is sufficient legislation in place but the problem is the lack of supervision.
Could I highlight a few points which have also been touched upon by the Commissioner?
First of all, the port-state control, according to which 25% of all ships require inspection.
I think that this 25% should not only be enforced but that it should also be ensured that more inspections take place. So this 25% should be increased.
Furthermore, if a ship is no longer seaworthy, not only should the facts be examined, but a legal system should be introduced which states or recommends that the vessel should no longer be used.
But this is not in place.
Mr President, I would welcome some action in this area.
Finally, as far as the technical requirements for ships are concerned, some Members have already mentioned just now that, since 1999 in the United States, ships should in any case be double-hulled.
In my opinion, we should look further into this point, and I also think that the Marpol Treaty, which comes into effect in 2001, should be looked at very closely.
Mr President, I would like to take a brief, critical look at the accession negotiations with Malta and would like to express my gratitude to, and admiration for, the many NGOs that have at least rolled up their sleeves in order to save animals.
Mr President, we have already had this discussion so many times in the past.
We have achieved nothing so far, and we have been unable to reach agreement within the European Union.
That is why I will only believe that there is any point to having this debate today if what we are all saying today, and what the Commissioner has announced here, actually leads to legislation being produced; in other words, if you all go and say to your Heads of Government and Ministers: "you must push this through in the Council of Ministers" .
Allow me to say first that what we are talking about is an environmental catastrophe, which also impacts on the economy and threatens livelihoods.
So what are we to do now?
I have no intention of talking about past events; rather I want to look to the future.
What are we to do now?
I will tell you a few things we should do.
Of course, we need double-hulled vessels.
That goes without saying, but it is something that will only work through in the medium and long term.
So what do we need to happen immediately?
We need technical testing of ships, that is obligatory technical testing every two years, and no ship to be operated without the accompanying certificate.
We need this at European level and internationally; we need something like a TÜV, an organisation that undertakes technical testing of motor vehicles in Germany, which is compulsory every two years.
If you do not have a certificate then you are not allowed to operate the vehicle.
This is what we need for ships.
Thirdly, we need to carry out checks on these safety and insurance certificates in the ports, that is in every port of the European Union.
Any failure to produce these certificates must lead to the ship being laid up and prohibited from leaving the port, regardless of all the port charges.
We must reach agreement here, in all the European Union' s ports, from Marseilles, through to Rotterdam, to Wilhelmshaven, Cuxhaven, and wherever ships drop anchor.
Fourthly, we need the shipowner to bear liability, and not just to the tune of a derisory USD 12 million, but to the value of at least USD 400 million, to be covered per insurance certificate.
We also need the country whose flag the ship flies to bear liability.
We need to be sure that if need be, the country whose flag the ship is flying will accept liability.
This would be a marvellous exercise in supervision!
I can assure you that those countries awarding flags would then take great care to avoid having to accept liability.
In the fifth place, we need there to be a guarantee that these demands will apply to all ships using the ports and waterways of the European Union, and incidentally, that includes the candidate countries.
Last but not least, we need a long memory, for the issue of legislation will crop up on the agenda more frequently in the near future.
Environmental standards will be a recurring theme.
I would not like to have someone coming and saying that these requirements will lead to job losses in the ports.
The unions will have something to say as will industry.
A long memory will serve us well, ladies and gentlemen.
I am looking at all those of you who have not exactly been at the forefront of the environmental movement.
Just you go home and say: " we have not concerned ourselves with standards to date" .
We need to have a long memory when it comes to the demands being made in the ports.
We need to have a long memory when we say: " for once we are united, at last as far as port charges and requirements are concerned, and will not play one off against the other in the European Union."
If we succeed in this then perhaps we will be better off in a few years' time!
Mr President, Mrs Roth-Behrendt expressed very many of my own thoughts.
We have now obtained a first-rate enumeration of a variety of measures.
But how do we make use of the sense of crisis to which this ecological disaster has led?
I would compare the situation with an earlier generation' s introduction of the Plimsoll line, a marking which was introduced to prevent insurance fraud involving inferior vessels.
Where is the sense of crisis which generations before us had?
I consider that what we should adopt is the form of certification that Mrs Roth-Behrendt speaks about, the identification in the form of green marks on tankers which certain harbours in Europe have brought up for discussion.
We must also critically examine the classification societies.
I do not think that we can accept their procedures.
We need independent procedures and procedures involving public control.
Finally, I want to say that, when my country provides environmental aid to shipowners who wish to improve the quality of the environment, there are units within the Commission who regard this as prohibited aid to shipyards.
Within the Commission, the one hand does not know what the other hand is doing.
It is not an acceptable procedure that measures to improve the environment, which are in keeping with the Commission' s guidelines, cannot be taken because these are considered to constitute prohibited aid to shipyards.
Mr President, we shall vote in favour of the GUE/NGL Group resolution because it denounces Total-Fina' s responsibility in this ecological disaster and I endorse the proposal that flags of convenience and the use of superannuated vessels should be prohibited, or that double hulls should be mandatory for oil tankers.
I shall only add that it would be the least that Total could do to compensate for the direct and indirect damage caused by the oil slick.
How can we stop similar disasters occurring in future if we do not institute draconian measures against the major oil corporations, and indeed many others who, in order to make more profit, take the risk of making the world uninhabitable?
How is it possible not to be outraged when a bank refuses to divulge the names of the Erika' s owners on the grounds of professional confidentiality, without governments reacting?
The crux of the problem is that all governments, and indeed all the European institutions, acknowledge the right of major corporations such as Total-Fina and its ilk to maximise profits whether it be harmful to their employees or to the environment.
They accept the professional confidentiality of business and banks, even though this same confidentiality serves to conceal what are essentially criminal actions.
In these circumstances, even the best resolutions will remain little more than appeals to principle which are powerless to limit the great corporations' capacity to cause damage.
Mr President, I am in favour of tightening up the legislation on port state control and on classification societies.
However, we must stick to the facts.
The ship Erika has been investigated four times in the course of the last two years.
The answer cannot lie in the number of investigations but rather in guaranteeing the rigour with which the controls are undertaken.
I have heard in the course of the discussions that have taken place in the last few weeks that the Member States do not have enough money to undertake the controls.
I cannot accept this.
If the Member States decide, in agreement with ourselves, that 25% of ships are to be monitored on the basis of port state control, then they must also make the necessary personnel available.
The controls must also be carried out in such a way that the inspector does not just go on board and check whether there are any fire extinguishers missing, rather there must be materials testing, for this ship obviously broke up on account of material fatigue.
This can only be detected if controls undertaken are more rigorous.
It should be our goal to ensure that port state controls are not superficial, but include materials testing.
Secondly, I also share the Commissioner' s observations and would like to encourage her to continue down this path.
If it should become apparent that one or more classification companies have provided reports by way of favours then they should be struck off the list of authorised classification companies.
That is the only deterrent we have for preventing other classification companies from following suit.
Mrs Roth-Behrendt, we already have a TÜV (organisation for safety testing) for ships in the form of the classification companies.
There are reputable companies too.
You will be familiar with some reputable companies, our French fellow MEPs will be familiar with some reputable companies, but we must look carefully at exactly which companies do not fulfil requirements, and these must be struck off the list.
Finally, we should make it quite plain to Malta that if it wants to become a Member of this Community then by the time it accedes it must apply a standard in respect of registration and flag state control which completely fulfils our requirements, for the environment is a communal entity and not something that we can divide up!
Mr President, Commissioner, the Erika sank near my home and is still there, with 20 000 tonnes in its hold, the fate of which we are waiting to discover.
It could have sunk anywhere.
It happened to sink there, and Brittany, where I come from, should not apologise for the fact that geography has made it a peninsula, and the result is that it is often forced to clear up after shipwrecks.
My first thoughts are for the 26 Indian sailors, who were saved but of whom nothing has been said.
There could have been deaths in this disaster and safety at sea means, above all, men' s lives.
By now they are far away.
It is a miracle that they were saved.
So we are now experiencing the same thing that happened 20 years ago with the Amoco Cadiz; a wreck on the North coast, a wreck on the South coast, a wreck on the West coast.
Things could well continue in the same way.
Commissioner, as time is very short, I would like to pick out the seven points which we feel, and you have already mentioned some of them, are essential to work on: double-hulled vessels in our waters as soon as possible and the strictest possible state control of ports. In particular, we must ensure that classification societies are compelled to make their reports public, as currently, we do not have access to them.
Then, sanctions must be harmonised between the 15 Member States; they should not be different, but the same throughout the Union.
We must be tougher on vessels flying flags of convenience, not because they are necessarily bad boats, but because amongst these boats there are many bad ones.
We must improve information on all of the world' s ships, but provision has already been made for this. We must also target those responsible and take a tougher line with them.
With regard to this matter, I would like to know who owns the Erika, because the idea of a legal person under our law is one thing, but there are always real shareholders in the background. Where are the Erika' s owners?
Perhaps they are in lovely villas by lovely beaches, getting a nice tan.
We would like to know their names and their faces.
Finally, there must be improvements in the training of crews.
In our society there is no such thing as zero-risk, but we must at least ensure the greatest possible levels of safety.
Mr President, I welcome the statement from the Commissioner.
Having spent a lot of time at sea myself I am well aware of the sea's power and destructive force, which make a proper design and maintenance of ships and boats essential.
I would like to express my sympathy with all those who are dealing with the consequences of the breaking up and sinking of the oil tanker Erika.
This has been an environmental disaster as well as a deplorable waste of resources.
It should be noted that the oil industry, through the International Oil Pollution Compensation Funds, regards itself as liable under the 1969 Convention and its 1992 Protocol, for over 90% of the estimated cost of this incident, or some USD 170 million.
This suggests to me that we should also look to the shipowners, to the flag state and the inspection authorities to shoulder their share of the responsibility.
However, before we rush in with a whole raft of new measures and new regulations, let us look carefully at the existing arrangements to be sure that they are being properly implemented.
Better to heed calls to amend and improve existing legislation than to embark on new proposals.
In that context I support calls to strengthen port state control to ensure full and effective inspection.
I support calls to ensure that the classification societies effectively monitor vessels' structural conditions and are held accountable for their actions.
Calls for design improvements in hull construction, especially double-hulled vessels, are sensible but take time to be implemented throughout the fleet.
They are no substitute for rigorous regular inspection.
Mr President, I would like to thank my Socialist colleagues, mainly in the committees on transport and the environment, who have not forgotten that this disaster also affects the fishing industry.
Because, as well as the irreparable damage to the environment, the damage to the ecosystem and losses in the tourist industry, the oil slick dealt a huge blow to the fishing industry, to the conservation of marine resources, and the damaged coast lines will take years to recover.
It is no accident, Commissioner, that the affected areas are always those European regions which are least developed, those which eke out a meagre existence from tourism and fishing and which, in the majority of cases, do not have any other resources.
These are the same areas, Commissioner, which already have to put up with the disrespectful activities of certain shipowners who empty the bilges of their vessels off their coasts, without any control whatsoever.
I come from a region, Galicia, which has suffered similar accidents in the past.
Brittany and Galicia, two European 'Lands Ends' , fall constant prey to the irresponsibility of those who prefer not to comply with safety regulations and transport crude oil in vessels which in themselves constitute potential oil slicks.
I therefore believe that it is necessary to act in two ways.
On the one hand, by asking the Commission, within the scope of aid to the fishing industry, to implement special measures to compensate for the effects of this catastrophe on the industry in the areas affected, and also by asking them to demand, of international bodies and of themselves, tight controls on ships which sail under flags of convenience.
In this regard, the current process of negotiations on Malta' s accession to the European Union must be used to ensure that this country rigorously monitors the oil tankers which sail under its flag.
On the other hand, prevention is essential.
Portugal is a country which has clearly demonstrated its sensitivity to issues relating to the sea.
I would ask the Portuguese Presidency to study the possibility of implementing a complete strategy for the prevention of maritime accidents at European level, using all the means at our disposal - technological, structural and socio-economic - to prevent a disaster such as this from happening again in the future.
Lastly, Mr President, I would like to highlight the work carried out by the volunteers and local authorities, who reminded me of old times when, as the then Mayoress, I lived through similar situations.
We must thank those who, while defenceless and lacking in resources, have battled courageously against the grave effects that this disaster has had on coastal regions, the marine ecosystem and European fishing stocks.
Mr President, as chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, I should like to congratulate the Commission, and in particular Commissioner Loyola de Palacio, for her reaction to this incident, which has really shaken the whole of Europe.
We, as the Committee on Transport, are prepared to discuss the Commission communication on the question of safety at sea and, of course, we are likewise prepared to discuss, at a later date, the legal implications of this communication.
In addition, I should like to make a number of comments:
First, the Commission was right to concentrate its investigation on the liability of RINA, the Italian shipping register, because we need to know if Community law was applied.
That should be the starting point for our efforts.
Secondly, apart from the shipowners' liability, it would be a good idea in such cases to examine the liability of the charterers, for example the oil companies which are also responsible for causing ecological disasters like this and, of course, for restoring the damage.
Once we have done that, our reaction to the ecological disaster is fully justified.
However, this should not lead us to accuse the whole merchant marine, which is an important sector of the economy, covering as it does 1/3 of transport requirements, which is why our reaction needs to be measured: strict, but correct.
I have no objection to examining an amendment making Community law stricter but, as other members have stressed, we need to start with application, because there is already a legal framework at European Union level and we must not lose sight of that fact.
This legal framework is fairly advanced, at least if you compare it with what is happening at worldwide level and the Member States, under the supervision of the Commission, should endeavour to ensure that Community law is actually applied.
Mr President, Commissioner, I believe that the unfortunate incident involving the Erika should in fact, as others have said this afternoon, constitute a decisive watershed which will see the end to this type of accident in the European Union where, since 1967, there have been seventeen accidents involving large oil tankers; more than one every two years.
