I also wonder about the wisdom of the EU and its reaction to the formation of the government in Austria and how that is going to affect public opinion there.
At the moment it seems that the Haider Party is getting more support rather than less from the opposition by outside governments.
Even America has now said that it is considering breaking off diplomatic relations.
We wonder if this is actually feeding the flames of xenophobia and the parties and people that support it.
I really think that people should be extremely cautious.
If you want to combat xenophobia and racism, and I believe that we should, we need to look at the root causes.
We need to look at the people who vote for these parties, and understand why this situation arises.
It is not a situation that most people in this Parliament want, but we need to be careful about the approach we take, so that we do not in the end up with the opposite of what we are trying to achieve.
Madam President, I strongly refute any statement, demonstration or feeling of xenophobia or racism.
I passionately defend Europe' s heritage of human rights and the rule of law.
I disagree, however, for this very reason, with the senseless actions taken by the Presidency - the Portuguese Presidency unfortunately - which have resulted in a real institutional blunder on behalf of the other fourteen States.
This is not the way to fight extremism.
It may even be a way of doing extremism a great deal of good.
The torrent of confusion and rash actions that has been unleashed over Austria has blown things out of all proportion. It has caused considerable distress to decent citizens and evokes risks that had previously not even been considered.
There is an irreconcilable contradiction between positions adopted in the name of human rights and the rule of law, but which at the same time attack the fundamental rights of the Austrians and ride roughshod over the basic tenets of the rule of law, in this case the standards laid down in the Treaties.
What are we actually seeking to achieve in embarking on an Intergovernmental Conference?
A Europe of 27 States or a Europe of 14, or even fewer?
We support Europe, a Europe which does honour to all the actions that have brought us to this point, a Europe which respects the Treaties and the law and a Europe which needs Austria.
This needs to be said!
Madam President, I am delighted and proud that this Parliament has, by an enormous majority, condemned the formation of the coalition in Austria incorporating Mr Haider' s Freedom Party.
Mr Haider has demonstrated, over the past years by both words and deeds, that he deserves to be excluded from normal democratic discourse.
Not only has he admired Adolf Hitler, praised the Waffen SS, and refused to condemn a terrorist bombing that killed four Roma, but also in Carinthia has been a member of the regional government.
He has led efforts to end provision for Austria' s Slovene-speaking minority and assistance to immigrants.
Some have said it is not right for us to interfere in Austrian politics.
They are wrong.
European Union Treaties make it incumbent on us to protect fundamental rights.
Some have said we have to accept the results of democratic elections.
However, democratic elections do not make democrats of those who have threatened democracy.
There is the tragic monument of the Holocaust, the death of 6 million Jews, to those who argued the same case with respect to Germany in the 1930s.
However, we should not condemn Mr Haider for ambition.
Leopards do not change their spots.
The real culprits are Austria' s Christian Democrat acting as Judas goats to resurrect a threat to Europe that we thought had died Berlin in 1945.
Madam President, we have just passed a resolution which condemns the racist and xenophobic record of Jörg Haider' s Freedom Party in Austria, which has welcomed action by our governments to cut off political relations with any government of which he is part, and which sends our support to anti-racist groups within the democratic majority of the Austrian people.
We warn that this coalition, if it is formed today, unacceptably legitimises the extreme right, directly in contradiction with the principles of peace and reconciliation, which bring us together in this European Union.
These are the values which we ask of others who seek to join us.
This European Parliament requires the European Commission to be vigilant of any racist action in Austria, and threatens to suspend Austria from membership of the European Union if this happens.
I am proud to support such a resolution.
Though our proposal to withdraw political invitations to any Austrian government representative to this European Parliament has not carried today, I give notice that we will further this proposal to ensure that any action within the powers of this European Parliament to combat the return of neo-Nazis to government in Europe can and will be taken.
I shall take the floor very briefly, Madam President.
I respect Parliament' s wish, as it has been expressed, but I must also say that the self-determination of peoples cannot be called into question, even by the European Parliament.
The document is unfair both to Austrian Members of the European Parliament, and to members of the Austrian national parliament, and it smacks slightly of jealousy and political interests, but also of business.
I do not believe that these signals will change the citizens' indifference to Europe.
The Austrian extreme right has been gifted an unwarranted present.
I very much welcome the position taken by the Italian Radicals; and I say this while making a clear historic and material distinction between Italian liberals and Austrian liberals.
I have for many years, in word and deed, been committed to the anti-fascist struggle and the struggles for equal rights and against xenophobia. However, recent events - firstly, what were really threats by the Council of Ministers, then Mr Prodi' s threats against the Austrian Commissioner and, finally, the present decision - are things I cannot support.
I have not been able to vote in favour of the present decision even though I agree with many of its premises. What we have here, first and foremost, is an incredibly ominous mixture of power, arrogance and impotence on the part of the European Union.
Not only do these decisions conflict with the Treaty and apportion to the institutions of the Union more power than that to which they are entitled but, worst of all, their effect will be counter-productive.
They will not weaken Mr Haider and the FPÖ. On the contrary, they will strengthen them.
We shall obtain the very opposite of what we want.
That is not how you combat racism and a swing to the right.
. (DA) The Left' s Members of the European Parliament attach importance to the fact that, with today' s decision, Parliament has NOT supported the fourteen prime ministers' diplomatic sanctions against Austria.
The Left' s Members of Parliament therefore supported the Liberal decision' s powerful rejection of any form of xenophobia in Austria or elsewhere.
We attach crucial importance to applying, if necessary, the new provisions under Article 7 of the Amsterdam Treaty so that a country which, by its actions, infringes fundamental citizens' rights by means of discrimination and such like will have its voting rights in the EU' s Council of Ministers removed.
- (EL) The Freedom Party' s participation in the Austrian Government is a dangerous development for the European Union' s political future.
It is a 'Trojan horse' which is unfortunately reappearing in Europe larger than ever since the Second World War.
The European Parliament and the Union' s governments must politically isolate a government that includes admirers of Nazism and advocates of xenophobia.
The European Union bears a large measure of responsibility - and along with it the two dominant political movements, the Social Democrats and the Christian Democrats - because, by their dogmatic adherence to the harsh financial policies of EMU, their dislocation of the welfare state and their deification of uncontrolled competition, they have pushed broad strata of society to the limits and made it possible for right-wing extremists of the Haider type to recruit support for their neo-Nazi ways.

In view of the fact that the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament do not permit us to table our own resolution condemning Haider' s party, as well as all the parties throughout Europe which disseminate racist slander and which are xenophobic and hostile to immigrant workers, we voted in favour of the compromise resolution. We did so even though we did not agree with some of its recitals or terms, in order to show our solidarity with all those in Austria itself who are opposing the Austrian extreme right and its demagoguery.
Our vote in no way constitutes an endorsement of the signatories to this compromise resolution, their present policy or their future attitude should the threat of the extreme right become more serious.
Some of these parties, despite declaring themselves to be republican and democratic, adopt the demagoguery of the extreme right, either out of connivance or as a vote-winning ploy, if only in openly and hypocritically blaming the immigrant workers in our countries for unemployment, and generally making their lives more difficult.
More generally, those signatories who take part in or have taken part in government in the various States of the European Union must take their share of responsibility in the influence which the extreme right has managed to gain since their policy, devoted exclusively to the interests of big business, has not included taking action likely to eradicate unemployment and the poverty it engenders, and has thus facilitated the xenophobic demagoguery of the extreme right.
This week we heard the first political cry of the new-born Europe.
By staunchly and speedily denouncing the participation of Jörg Haider' s xenophobic and anti-European party in the Austrian government, a situation without precedent since the second world war, the European Union has come into its political birthright and has confirmed that it is not merely an economic and financial Community, a large market, a "Europe of shopkeepers" .
It is a part of its future which is at stake right now, part of its very essence, its heart and soul.
The European Parliament was the first to speak up.
The appeal by the European Socialists, on the initiative of Olivier Duhamel, raised awareness and enabled there to be a firm and immediate political response to this unheard of and intolerable situation.
A firm attitude which the 14 European States have demonstrated unanimously and promptly, through Mr Guterres, by condemning the risk of the Austrian political situation getting out of control.
This courageous stance turns a new page in the construction of Europe.
A return to the roots, at last, for a Community built on the basis of the determination to turn our backs on a past history marred by hatred and exclusion and of adherence to the humanist values of openness and tolerance.
Europe has managed to stand up to condemn unacceptable events.
However, as it lacks the legal instruments to support this political will, since the sanctions stipulated under Article 7 of the Treaties are virtually impossible to apply, will it be able to keep its head high in the face of the threat of the systematic blocking of its entire institutional structure?
The whole credibility of Europe is at stake today, before we invite the recent and still vulnerable democracies of the former eastern bloc to join us tomorrow.
From now on Europe must put its words into action if it wishes to show the world the scope of its rediscovered ambition.
At this time when we are voting on a joint resolution against the inclusion of neo-Nazis in the government of a European Union Member State, I must express my regrets regarding a compromise text which is particularly lacking in backbone.
I am voting in favour of it because it is inconceivable that the European Parliament, after its excellent political debate yesterday, should not adopt a stance on this matter.
Personally, however, I shall continue to fight against the extreme right, to urge people to sign a petition to demand measures which may go as far as the exclusion of Austria, and to organise a major public demonstration in Lille on Saturday at 3 p.m.
Fascism and neo-Nazism are cancers!
The foul monster has been reawakened!
For me there is no question of allowing them to develop and to flourish without fighting with all our might.
Europe was born out of a desire for peace, freedom and tolerance.
There is no question of it allowing xenophobic, racist and anti-Semitic ministers to be tolerated at within it.
Do not count on me to keep quiet, without doing or saying anything.
In yesterday' s debate in the European Parliament some Members of this Parliament expressed worry that we were interfering in the internal affairs of a Member State.
Such a concern is misplaced.
The European Parliament has never been slow to comment on developments in Member States with which they disagree.
We have condemned Basque and Irish terrorism.
We have opposed racism and the infringement of the rights of minorities.
It is our responsibility as a parliament, particularly as the democratically elected voice of the European Union, to comment on current political developments in Austria which are in conflict with the policies of this parliament.
By commenting and making our views known we are not preventing any party in Austria from forming a coalition government.
We are nonetheless, as is our right as well as our responsibility, telling them that if they go ahead then there are consequences arising from such a decision and in fact we are warning them beforehand.
Others would argue that we should suspend judgement until we see the detail of such an agreement.
Such a view is not only a political cop-out, it is positively dangerous.
In reaching an agreement with Jörg Haider and his party, the Austrian Christian Democrats would at a stroke be confirming political respectability on right wing extremism and also giving them access to power - both of which they will utilise as a launching pad for even greater electoral success.
That is why the European Union must make its position clear regarding the current situation in Austria.
- (SV) We have voted in favour of the common resolution in order to express our solidarity with all those who are exposed to xenophobia and racism.
We have also voted in favour of the resolution in protest against the detestable politics that Jörg Haider stands for.
We are nonetheless very critical of the methods which the 14 Member States have employed on this issue.
The resolution makes no clear reference to respect for the Member States' national identities and constitutional traditions in accordance with Article 6 of the Treaty.
What is also missing is a paragraph concerning the EU' s shared responsibility for the social and political developments in Europe and Austria which have been among the prior conditions for Mr Haider' s electoral success.
Today, as previously in the history of Europe, right-wing extremism is the result of insecure social and economic conditions of life.
The policy of cut-backs which has followed in the wake of adjusting to EMU has promoted the successes of right-wing extremism.
A radical policy to promote security and justice in each country is the best guarantee of democratic development in Europe.
- (DE) I am making this statement on behalf of the CSU.
It is intolerable that the EU should involve itself in the formation of the government in a Member State.
It has no right to do so.
Instead of prematurely condemning the FPÖ and the Austrian Government which is being formed, there should first be a critical examination and assessment of the governmental declaration and the party programme and policies of the coalition.
Only after such critical appraisal of the future policies of the parties involved in the coalition discussions can a decision be made as to whether this government is contrary to the democratic spirit of Europe.
This does not mean that we sympathise with Haider.
The CSU European delegates have no sympathy whatsoever with the leader of the FPÖ.
However, as politicians we must ask the question why 27% of the Austrian population voted for a party such as the FPÖ at the elections in October 1999.
We must concern ourselves with the reasons for this and try to deal with the reasons behind such results.
Only by tackling the arguments and policies of the FPÖ can we prevent a radicalisation of Austrian politics.
However, the resolution of the European Parliament does not question the reasons for the outcome of the Austrian vote and offers no options for resolving the problem.
For these reasons the CSU European delegates are against this resolution.
"He knew what those jubilant crowds did not know but could have learned from books: that the plague bacillus never dies or disappears for good; that it can lie dormant for years and years in furniture and linen-chests; that it bides its time in bedrooms, cellars, trunks, and bookshelves; and that perhaps the day would come when, for the bane and the enlightening of men, it would rouse up its rats again and send them forth to die in a happy city."
It is with these phrases that Albert Camus, at the close of the long allegorical novel describing the difficult fight of the citizens of the town of Oran against the plague, reminds us, at the close of the Second World War, that the fight against Nazism, "the brown plague" as it was termed at the time, could not enjoy a definitive victory.
That because racial hatred, xenophobic violence, fear and rejection of what is different, have deep roots in all that is basest in humanity, they may re-emerge at any moment and take over any group of human beings.
In this light, the events we are seeing in Austria must be seen as tragic.
For the first time since the Second World War, a party which is openly pro-Nazi, racist and xenophobic has gained access to power in a European country.
Confronted with this threat, which carries with it the negation of the very idea which lies at the heart of the construction of Europe, nothing must deter us: not the legal quibbling about what the treaty does or does not permit, not the legitimate questions about the right to intervene, not the derisory respect for formal democracy, and, above all, not the feeling of powerlessness which grips us in the face of an event which we reject with all the force of our convictions but which we are powerless to control.
As the representative for a French overseas department, the island of Réunion, a land of racial and ethnic intermixing, where the population has been forged in the course of the last three centuries by the successive contributions of Europeans, blacks from Africa or Madagascar, enlisted men from India or Pakistan, or even Chinese, every day I experience the profound truth of the remark by Saint-Exupéry, "In being different to me, you are not doing me harm, brother, but enriching me!"
This human diversity is our main sources of wealth, and this is the reason why it is my duty to track down and to condemn anything which may be harmful to it, wherever it may exist.
For all these reasons I voted most decidedly in favour of the resolution before this House on the formation of the government in Austria.
Jörg Haider' s rise to power, with the inauguration of a conservative right-wing and FPÖ coalition government, is a sign of the terrible revival in Europe of a monster to which liberalism has given birth.
The success of the Austrian Freedom Party owes as much to the endorsement of respectability provided by the Austrian right wing and social democrats as to the policy of the latter, whose social disasters paved the way for extreme right-wing populism.
The resolution stipulates possible diplomatic means to isolate the new government politically without even mentioning the root causes of the resurgence of Fascism.
It can be explained by the feeling of helplessness of the people who are the victims of the ideology of mighty Mammon and by the choice of the ruling classes to promote strong government in order to take their policies of austerity and deregulation ever further.
In order to oppose the xenophobic statements of an apprentice dictator who is nostalgic for the Third Reich, we must take every opportunity we can to express our solidarity with the Austrians opposed to Fascism.
This is why we are voting in favour of this resolution in spite of its hypocritical references to a 'European democratic model' which bears more resemblance to a fortress which tracks downs, expels and imprisons immigrants without the proper papers, when it is not opening files on teenagers.
- (DE) I have just voted against the motion for a resolution on the situation in Austria in view of a possible government being formed between the ÖVP and the FPÖ.
I consider the casting of Jörg Haider as "Europe's scapegoat" (or even worse, neo-Nazi and Super Racist) to be counterproductive.
Of course I, in no way, agree with the publicised statements of this right-wing populist and fully condemn xenophobia and any downplaying of the Hitler regime.
However, I fear that a purely emotional reaction by Europe to the events in Austria will only multiply Haider's adherents.
The EU must not do him an invaluable PR service.
The strength of the FPÖ can be traced back to the weakness of the previous government and in this the Austrian socialists must bear the main responsibility.
It was only after they unsuccessfully solicited the FPÖ to tolerate a minority government and, obviously in vain, offered the Freedom Party ministerial posts, that the SPÖ begin its massive campaign against Haider.
It turned its threatened loss of power into an "heroic battle for the preservation of values" and an imminent, pure-and-simple "decision between democracy and non-democracy" .
This is a smear on the voters in my neighbouring country which I cannot condone.
We German Christian Democrats used another strategy in the battle against extremists and clearly disassociated ourselves from them.
We revealed the hollowness of the republicans who were nationalistic, xenophobic and anti-minority.
Today the republicans are no longer represented in most local parliaments.
The German approach is no guarantee that this radical movement will not grow again.
It cannot be copied arbitrarily since each Member State has its own specific conditions.
The ÖVP (Austrian People's Party), whose presence at European level we have also come to take for granted, is daring to attempt a coalition for the sake of governability in Austria.
It can only succeed if agreements are made which are solidly based on compliance with democratic principles.
The Council has become prematurely involved without waiting for the results of the coalition negotiations or a programme of government.
This condemnation is as unacceptable as the threatened breaking off of official contacts with the Austrian Republic.
Sound democracy means being alert and not blind in one eye.
We must take up a reasoned offensive against radicals on both the right and the left.
