It must clearly be accepted that the people should be free to make their decisions at the level which best combines the objective conditions of an immediate, fair and transparent democratic debate, namely at national level in the main.
Yet the whole of the Commission communication is based on the opposite theory. In this theory, on the pretext of ensuring the best protection for peoples, their margin of independent choice should be increasingly limited by new regulations, new policies or new, restrictive legal structures such as the draft Charter of Fundamental Rights.
This Charter is really misnamed because it will actually reduce these rights.
In the Union for a Europe of Nations Group our principles are rather different.
Clearly we want to defend the countries of Europe but we also want to respect the autonomy of nations.
This is not impossible.
We must move away from the outmoded federalist schemes promoted by those whose every idea on European matters comes from the Memoires of Jean Monnet.
Instead, we must open the European institutions to the modern world by creating a flexible dynamic which respects nations.
This is the keynote idea on the new governance which we would have liked to have seen in your communication, Mr Prodi, but which is unfortunately not there.
Madam President, Mr Prodi, you claim to be shaping a new Europe yet you are lacking one basic element: confidence.
The confidence of millions of Europeans cannot be won without being worthy of this.
And how could you be worthy of this after the mad cow scandal and the resignation of the Santer Commission for corruption?
You are responsible for millions of unemployed and for millions living in poverty, insecurity and increasing misery because of your ultra-trade-oriented and ultra-liberal policies and because of the forced march towards the single currency.
You wanted and have obtained the abolition of internal borders. Consequently, you have opened Europe up to an explosion in crime and insecurity and to a flood of uncontrolled immigration.
You are now proposing to give all decision-making power to a handful of officials. The Member States, local authorities and NGOs will simply become enforcers of decisions handed down from above, all on an equal footing in their submission to Brussels.
Not once does your twelve-page document mention the national parliaments even though they comprise the elected representatives of the people.
Clearly, they have no role to play in your strategy.
You dare not even call a spade a spade, but instead hide behind pseudo-trendy language by using the term 'governance' for what is nothing more than federal, autocratic, centralised government.
Having tried for many years to persuade us by talking of shared sovereignty, you are now revealing your ultimate goal. You intend to trade in all European sovereignty, whether national or collective, for a world government in which you do not even expect to obtain a dominant position.
Finally, you are daring to condemn and penalise the free and democratic vote of millions of Austrians, or are allowing this to happen, just because the result does not suit you.
Yet at the same time you are supporting Communist China and trading with countries which have openly violated human rights for decades.
Members of this House are today speaking out against a telegram from Mr Prodi to Chancellor SchÌssel which, quite obviously, is not a demonstration of sympathy but rather a political manoeuvre.
Your sabre-rattling fools no one because, as you know perfectly well, whether you like it or not, you need Austria in order to reform the Treaties and harmonise savings tax.
You will cynically and hypocritically use Austria as a convenient threat to further strip the Member States of any real powers in the construction of the European Union.
Your Commissioners are clearly not solely responsible for this.
The governments which, through spinelessness or ideology, support you are also responsible.
Brussels is not all of us, as you claim. It is all of you.
Tell the truth for once. You could not care less what the people of Europe want.
They are free to choose only between your brave new world and denouncement.
It is over ten years since the collapse of the Soviet Union and yet your projects contain a strong hint of the gulags and mollifying moralism.
We were among the small number who denounced the communist dictatorship.
We are and will remain among those fighting against Europeanist dictatorship. We call on all the people of Europe to resist your monstrous projects.
The salvation of European democracies is with nation states. Europe' s salvation lies in the cooperation of the nations of Europe.
(Limited applause)
President Prodi, today you have presented the Commission' s five-year programme, and it has many objectives that we endorse.
It is a programme based on real-life situations and issues, and it is therefore right to put concrete measures aside for the moment and focus on the major issues.
In my view, Mr Prodi, judging from the text and the document that you had sent to us, one subject that is very important to both of us has been given secondary importance, and that is solidarity, not so much at international level as at internal level.
The Archbishop of Milan, Monsignor Carlo Maria Martini, is calling upon all politicians, in particular those like you and me, President Prodi, for whom the cultural and historic principle behind their presence in politics is the principle of the active involvement of Catholics in politics, to reconsider a development process, which, in addition to economic profit, takes the marginalised and those left behind by society very much into account.
It is of the utmost importance to address the issue of those who cannot keep up, one which reminds us of how difficult and complicated it is to establish progress indicators and how inadequate it is to use the parameter of per capita income alone.
It also reminds us of the need for a new growth model, one that is firmly rooted in the culture of the Catholics who are involved in social problems, who see, in the civil community and the social interaction that that must be encouraged and facilitated among the public, the most natural instruments for building solidarity.
The fundamental element for the development of each person - his freedom, which comes before economic gain - is thus enhanced.
This social freedom, which becomes manifest in initiatives favouring the poor, gives excellent results in terms of social justice and stability.
Mr President, public institutions must not accept only the economic criterion.
They must focus on service to people and commitment to achieving freedom for each individual, without forgetting, naturally, that all this cannot and must not conflict with the need to create business, to invest and risk, and in an ordered and focused system, entrepreneurs are able to make a substantial contribution to social growth solidarity.
In the age of globalisation, which we do want to facilitate with a framework of specific rules that will provide guarantees to the economic operators and consumers, the European Commission cannot forget solidarity, and must call for its implementation through the use of all of man' s spiritual resources in his relations with his fellow man.
Our heritage has taught us that politics must have a heart.
We hope that the White Paper and the actions of you and your Commission will put this into practice.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, 'Shaping the new Europe' is an ambitious objective both for the Commission and for us all.
Our ambitions and our work will be followed not only by people in our own countries, but also by many people outside Europe and the European Union.
What sort of impression will an interested public, as well as the rest of the world, have of this five-year programme?
My reply would be: a new start, a clear agenda for reform which confirms that the Union in the 2000s will not stop at being an economic community but will become a community that can be trusted and that we take seriously.
The Commission is correct in stating that the Union intends to develop and safeguard the welfare state in an age of globalisation.
It foresees a just and more effective Europe that also recognises its responsibilities beyond its own borders out of solidarity and enlightened self-interest.
Consequently, we see poverty and exclusion as the greatest enemies of peace and freedom.
I concur with what other members of my political group have said and I commend the tone of your document. However, there are two omissions which need to be addressed in our future work.
The first concerns women, gender and women's rights.
You talked about how women can help in increasing production and growth.
That is important, but equality is not only necessary for productivity, but also to make our societies more democratic.
It is therefore noticeable that 'equality', 'gender' and 'women' are barely mentioned in 'Shaping the New Europe'.
You mentioned 'women' in your speech, but they are not referred to in the context of the strategic goals.
Is that because mainstreaming is already so widespread in the Commission that there is no need to mention women?
What other explanation could there be for omitting women?
The EU must not take on a masculine persona.
My other question concerns Africa, which is the only continent not mentioned in 'Shaping the New Europe'.
Africa has the largest number of refugees in the world, the most overall poverty and a debilitating AIDS epidemic.
I know that Commissioner Nielson and some of the other Commissioners are doing a fine job, but the rest of the Commission also needs to focus more clearly on that continent, partly by including it among its strategic goals.
Finally, I welcome the Commission's statement and the fact that this says for the first time that the EU is prepared unilaterally to introduce measures to make it easier for developing countries to gain access to our markets.
I would merely ask when this is likely to take effect.
Madam President, President of the Commission, this is a vital document for the future and fate of Europe.
However, out of all the points, two specifically require our attention, and they are closely linked: peace and stability within Europe and outside Europe.
It is a question of objectives that must be pursued as a priority.
For some time, we have all agreed on this notion, but we must also clearly affirm that these objectives will not be achieved without enlargement, even if this comes at a price.
Today, we have been called on to choose, for the forthcoming decades, between a Europe that might be less prosperous but a beacon of peace and civilisation for the whole planet and a Europe that might be more wealthy, but where there is uncertainty over what the future might bring.
These goals will be more easily obtainable only if the Intergovernmental Conference, which will draw to a close within the year, results in constitutional reform, providing the Commission with real and adequate powers so that it will no longer merely implement Council decisions or Parliament' s codecisions but will have to perform the role of a real European government.
The first supporter of this reform should be Parliament itself, if it really wants to increase its role of interpreting the will of the Europeans and acquire the centrality which is part of a genuinely democratic and firmly integrated Union.
Moreover, it will only be possible to give the Commission responsibility for the tasks it takes on according to the actual powers it will be accorded.
Without these prospects that we have outlined, Europe would, once again, have no future.
Madam President, Mr Prodi, we are pleased about the overall intention of the objectives announced which are in line with the challenges which Europe must overcome.
I note that you consider the fall of the Berlin wall to be the crucial factor of the end of the century.
This event must underpin enlargement.
Rather than using the word 'enlargement' , I want to talk of reunification which has much greater political significance.
Your idea is to concentrate your activities on the core tasks. This is one of the goals of your reform.
In essence this means applying the principle of subsidiarity.
Precise application of this principle can only reinforce the actions taken and give our citizens a clear view of each level of competence.
However, saying is one thing and doing is another!
You must therefore fight against the tendency of all institutions to try and increase their powers.
I will therefore judge you on your deeds.
In the meantime, I approve and encourage this clearly expressed desire in your communication.
However, I must make two essential points. These concern the simplification and application of Community law.
In 1998, 123 referrals were made to the Court of Justice for non-application or non-transposition and 25% of environmental directives were not applied or transposed.
Recent events have shown us that these regulations are essential.
Community law must not go unapplied because it is too complex or too pedantic.
The Union must not make this mistake and I therefore regret the fact that your communication does not go into more detail on this.
You are being realistic when you say that the welfare state can no longer provide adequate responses to the problems facing us, including unemployment.
Nevertheless, I regret that a clear alternative has not been proposed.
The emphasis should have been placed on the rejection of any policy of handouts and instead on the development of initiative and responsibility.
You have not highlighted the ageing of our population which will fundamentally alter the structure of our society, not only economically but also in terms of public health.
This is a silent revolution and in this respect I expected more from your communication.
Finally, you do highlight European research as being at the heart of our future.
Yet you do not indicate the resources you intend to implement to achieve this.
Also, ethical principles are at the heart of this research but your communication says nothing about these.
If you want to better inform the people, you should start by strengthening liaison with this House, as we are the representatives of the citizens.
Madam President, we can only endorse the general guidelines of the five-year programme and of the programme for 2000, set out with so much enthusiasm by President Prodi this morning.
In the two documents, strong emphasis is placed on the need to define new forms of European governance and, to this end, to introduce a new agenda for the Commission, establishing more stringent priorities in the pursuit of the goal of full employment, through more efficient coordination of the economic and social policies of the States, and, primarily - allow me to stress this - of the nations that have joined the monetary union and which must be enabled to become the first example of closer cooperation.
To this end, I shall confine myself to stressing, out of all the choices available, the importance of three priority decisions which should, in the drawing-up of action programmes for the government of the Union, be the basis for both the Commission' s agenda and the actions of the European Union in the coming months.
Firstly, the promotion of and participation in the drafting of joint plans for the creation of an integrated services network in the transport and energy sectors, with the backing of the European Investment Bank.
Secondly, the approval of investments - where the parameters are binding when drawing up action programmes on employment - to be made in individual countries via Community projects in the priority sectors of research, innovation and training.
I feel that these parameters - particularly those of a qualitative nature, resulting from investments in continuous training, refresher courses, adaptability and retraining of older workers - are considerably more significant and binding owing to their lasting effects over the medium term than the simple drawing up of annual quantitative objectives, that are always debatable, regarding new employment or employment cuts.
If, among other things, as the programme of the Portuguese Presidency stresses as well, the Commission could promote a new phase of social dialogue, focusing on an agreed strategy of socialisation and diffusion of knowledge, in other words, a strategy for employability and the definition of its rules, this would allow us to take a step towards having employees participate in the informed and consensual management of the restructuring and reemployment processes.
Thirdly, I do not think that the decrease in the number of the working population, owing to the ageing of the population, is unavoidable and inevitable for the European Union. This is not just because of the existence of margins which would permit an increase in the number of working women and immigration, but because we need to be determined in reversing the widespread trend of early retirements from the job market, and direct the coordinated reform of social welfare systems, certainly not towards large reductions in future pension payments but towards the active use of people' s increased life expectancy and towards a longer working life.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, you have come here today, Mr Prodi, in a very reformist and ambitious mood.
I welcome you and your ambition.
Ambition will be needed, given the mammoth task which awaits us.
In order to make these reforms, however, and in order to make progress with the 2001 legislative programme, we must be very sure, not only of the strengths of the reformer himself, but also of the opinions of others.
You say that you will not hesitate to come to this House to request more resources for the Commission, but the Commission must be aware that we are walking on thin financial ice.
We have 1.27% of the Community' s GDP.
Not a euro more or a euro less.
It will not be us who refuse these new resources. You should ask the Council.
These financial perspectives are adjusted to within a millimetre.
In order to finance the stability plan for the Balkans, we will have to negotiate a significant revision of Category 4, and you must remember the enormous difficulties we have had in approving the 2000 budget.
I would remind you that this Group, the PPE-DE, does not like to finance new political initiatives at the expense of existing ones.
The political priorities must be set by this House and the MEPs.
Do not believe for one moment that your proposed reform of the budget will disguise the limitations of the Community financial system.
It is all very well for us, by mutual consensus, to make an effort in terms of budgetary rationalisation, but you must be very aware that the lack of resources, the absence of financial autonomy and the poor execution of the budget, continue to be urgent issues which must be resolved.
We therefore wonder whether the Commission has the political will to resolve them.
Madam President, the Commission communication is well written but sufficiently vague to allow any interpretation whatsoever.
On one hand, there are the words and, on the other, their real political meaning.
We Socialists applaud the Commission for wanting to fight against social exclusion and poverty.
Yet how can the gulf between political rhetoric and reality be filled?
What is meant by the Commission' s declared objective of 'economic reform' in the labour market?
Does this mean more flexibility, insecurity and fixed-term contracts?
Everyone knows that quality of life and full and better employment depend on sustainable economic growth.
The Union is currently restricted to a policy of stability which is certainly necessary but insufficient.
We Socialists desperately want a European pact for growth and employment.
The ingredients of this policy are well known. They are the stimulation of public and private investment, increased investment in research, education and training and the promotion of the spirit of enterprise.
In this respect, the e-Europe initiative is to be welcomed.
In the world of new technologies, the main danger remains that access to information will be easier the richer you are.
The gulfs which are opening up everywhere are the main problem for our era.
On one hand we have the exuberance of the financial markets and the explosion of wealth and, on the other, more widespread exclusion.
We are asking workers to be flexible, innovative and ever more productive, yet the fruits of this productivity increasingly benefit the shareholders alone.
The European Central Bank is keeping very quiet about the staggering rates of return on financial assets, yet it never misses an opportunity to remind us that any wage increase should remain below the rate of increase in productivity.
How do we explain to workers who fall victim to the rationalisations of the worldwide Monopoly game that they must be prepared to change career several times in their working lives when the captains of industry, having lost the gamble of a take-over, leave with compensation of EUR 30 million?
For years we have been told over and over that the economy must be liberalised.
The sectors which have been liberalised are experiencing an avalanche of mergers and acquisitions, leading inevitably to monopoly situations.
All these stock market battles are based solely on forecast increases in profit of 15%, 20% or 25% which are unrealistic in the long term.
The unfettered rise in prices of financial assets and property means that the risks are on the increase.
The main danger awaiting us in the medium term is not inflation but deflation caused by the collapse of the speculative bubbles on the international financial markets.
To conclude, the next five years will be crucial.
We need new rules to regulate globalisation and we need investment in the real economy and in people. We need the Member States and the Commission to ensure the social dimension of the market economy in a visible manner.
Madam President, Mr President of the Commission, Commissioners, in my view, this strategy paper has two clear weaknesses.
