Although the main achievements in the construction of an area of freedom, security and justice should be mentioned, we must remember that there is still room for progress.
The role of the Court of Justice is still too limited and communitisation is incomplete.
The unilateral decision by Belgium to re-establish border controls is a clear illustration of this.
The decision to establish a Charter of Fundamental Rights is to be welcomed but it is difficult to predict whether its content and legal scope will be restrictive or symbolic, including all people, whatever their nationality, or excluding some.
The total lack of progress in European citizenship and the political rights of all European residents is to be regretted.
Although action plans established by the high-level working group aim to limit migratory flows in the future, these plans do nothing to improve human rights, civil liberties and the economic situation in the countries concerned.
We know that readmission clauses are included in the cooperation and association agreements.
Yet these represent a serious threat to the principle of 'non-refoulement' [no turning back].
Furthermore, it should be noted that these provisions were adopted within the Council by a procedure without debate and without consulting Parliament.
However, the main concern remains ...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Mr President, I would like to join my colleagues in welcoming the representatives of the Council as well as the Commissioner.
I thank them for their statements to the House.
Rather than go back over the areas that have already been covered I would like to deal with one specific topic: the question of drugs and how we tackle the pervasiveness of the drug culture in our societies.
I look to the Portuguese Presidency in particular to build on some of the tremendous work which was done by the Finnish Presidency in bringing forward coordinated plans and action between the Member States.
We already have, on the international side, plans in place to combat drug trafficking, money laundering and so on.
But to bring it down to a more human level: to give assistance to those people who are trying to come off drugs, and give them proper controls and proper mechanisms for rehabilitation; secondly, to coordinate amongst the police forces and the judiciary with regard to common penalties and common laws; thirdly, to undertake an information and awareness campaign for young people; and once and for all to put an end to these very dangerous words of "normalisation" and "harm reduction" and show that any weakening of our resolve in making sure that drugs are not legalised must be for the good of all our people.
Mr President, I would like to use the few seconds of speaking time to which I am entitled to point out, or remind, the representative of the Commission that, in Belgium, the government is currently pursuing a policy under which thousands and possibly tens of thousands of illegal aliens are being legalised and are to receive permanent right of residence, right to be reunited with their families, etc.
This is a Belgian government measure which flies in the face of the Schengen Treaty.
I lodged a written complaint on the same subject to Commissioner Vitorino on 23 December.
I would ask him to take this complaint into consideration and inform me, within the foreseeable future, of the steps the Commission will take to penalise this violation of the Schengen Treaty by the Belgian State, in accordance with Article 226 of the Treaty.
Mr President, esteemed gentlemen from Portugal, especially the Council representatives, you face great expectations on our part.
I should like to give you an example of one way in which you can meet these expectations relatively quickly in at least one small segment.
I refer to Eurodac.
You will remember that we decided with great expectations here in the European Parliament in December that Eurodac would become a reality as a regulation and as a system, as a Community instrument which we urgently need in order to prevent multiple asylum applications, in order to have an instrument to fight illegality and, above all, in order to set out clearly which Member State was responsible for implementing the asylum procedure.
We voted clearly in favour of the introduction of this instrument, together with an implementation committee, which would be attached to the Commission in just the same way that a corresponding database would be.
We were of the opinion that EURODAC was becoming a reality.
Even in Tampere, we were of the opinion that Eurodac was becoming a reality.
However, the Council then took another direction at the very next summit in December and took a huge step backwards by deciding what we had absolutely rejected, i.e. that the Council should continue to be responsible for implementation, that the regulatory committee would be attached to the Council and that, where possible, Gibraltar would still be used to exert pressure.
This is a perfect example of the sort of work we do not want to see.
My urgent request on behalf of the Group is that you do everything to ensure that Eurodac is implemented immediately as an instrument to fight asylum abuse and illegality and as an instrument to speed up asylum procedures.
If you tell us today how you wish to proceed, you will be doing us a great service.
Mr President, Ministers, Commissioner, the 1999 harvest of decisions was indeed rich, so much so that it became difficult to gather, i.e. to put those decisions into practice.
I refer in particular to the Council and to the inertia of the Member States in implementing the decisions they had jointly made.
However, the past year was positively marked by some momentous decisions, such as the decision to begin implementing the Treaty of Amsterdam, the decision to incorporate the Schengen Agreement into the Community pillar, and the decision of the Cologne Council to create a Charter of Fundamental Rights and the decision of the Extraordinary European Council in Tampere to bind the Member States to common directions, priorities and goals with a view to creating a common area of freedom, security and justice.
Without wishing to ignore the progress which has been made, we, the European Parliament, would like to draw your attention to the unwillingness on the part of the Council to implement these decisions in many areas, as well as its lack of common vision and, in particular, the lack of transparency and cooperation with the European Parliament.
From what I have said, it must be obvious to you that the European Parliament is not prepared to simply play the role of observer.
Neither will it stop raising vital issues. For example, how much progress are you willing to make and what measures, legislative or otherwise, will you be taking to combat the scourge of trafficking in human beings, child pornography on the Internet, drugs, and organised crime?
Do you intend to press for a common policy for asylum and immigration?
How do you intend to go about integrating immigrants into the Community, reuniting them with their families and recognising their rights and duties on an equal footing with those of the citizens of Europe?
In light of this new international demographic class portrayed by experts at the UN, is it not about time you abandoned your traditional, conservative views on refugees and immigrants?
I have great expectations for the Portuguese Presidency.
Mr President, I welcome much, indeed most, of what has been said in this debate.
But I want to add a word of caution.
We risk having not too few charters of rights in this Community, but too many: national, European Union and European Convention; not too few tribunals having the final say about our rights but possibly too many - there is the Court across the river there, there is the Court in Luxembourg.
There are also courts in Karlsruhe, London, Lisbon, Dublin and Edinburgh.
We must make sure that what we do makes clear sense.
We must not generate a confusion and conflict of jurisdictions about rights, for that would be the enemy of freedom, justice and security.
We need, in short, to have and to sustain the highest possible common standards and to find ways of securing these.
But we must look always to subsidiarity.
Like everybody in this House, I want freedom, justice and security. I do not want to see these degenerate into over-centralisation, chaos and confusion.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would very quickly like to make one point. Various Members raised questions about the Portuguese Presidency.
The President of Parliament has made us aware of the very limited time at our disposal, and my colleague, the Minister for Justice, and I therefore propose to reply objectively to all the questions put here at the parliamentary committee meeting which we shall be attending next week.
(Sustained applause)
Thank you, Minister.
The debate is closed.
Mr President, I am grateful for the Council' s oral, and also written, reply.
Their efficiency has been truly remarkable.
I will save a few seconds because I wanted to propose to the Council that we continue the debate at the next meeting of the Committee on Citizens' Rights and Freedoms, Justice and Home Affairs.
Then we will have the opportunity to comment on these replies and to express our concerns to the Commission as well.
Personally, I am pleased with some of the replies, for example, in relation to issues as sensitive as Schengen and the Europol Convention, which we hope will be reviewed, and I am pleased with the words of the Minister for Justice with regard to trying to bring them under the jurisdiction of the judicial authorities.
I also hope that the same is done in relation to parliamentary control.
Representatives of the Council, within the next month we are going to table a motion for a resolution in this Parliament.
I am sure that, with the willingness that you have shown today, the first thing you will do, in this new climate of understanding between us, will be to take account of the motion for a resolution which we will submit to you.
Question Time (Council)
The next item is Question Time (B5-0003/2000). We will examine questions to the Council.
Question No 1 by (H-0780/99):
Subject: Construction of nuclear plant in earthquake-prone Turkey The two recent earthquakes in Turkey registering more than 7 on the Richter scale raise tremendous doubts about Turkey's persistence with the construction of costly nuclear reactors at Akkuyu, while energy reserves produced by the AtatÌrk dams are exported to third countries and the EU spends a slice of its budget on repairing the damage wrought by the earthquakes.
Turkey's nuclear plans B which ignore the risks to the population and ecosystems of Turkey and the surrounding region B prompt the suspicion that there are underlying plans previously determined by Turkey's political and military leaders to acquire nuclear technology enabling them to build nuclear weapons, as evidenced by their attempts to buy reactors of Canadian origin of the type acquired by India and Pakistan.
What steps will the Council take to prevent nuclear accidents and the proliferation of nuclear weapons in a country that wishes to join the EU but spends enormous amounts on nuclear programmes while receiving financial aid from the EU budget?
Mr President, the Council wishes to point out that Turkey is a signatory to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the objectives of which should allay the fears expressed by Mr Souladakis.
The aim of this convention, which came into force on 24 October 1996, is precisely to achieve and maintain a high standard of nuclear safety at world level by means of national measures and through international cooperation.
It further aims to ensure that nuclear installations are equipped with continuing protection against potential radiological risks, so as to protect individuals, society at large and the environment against the harmful effects of the ionising radiation that can be emitted by such installations.
The convention, as you will be aware, also covers the prevention of accidents which have radiological effects and the limitation of such effects when incidents of this kind occur.
I would also like to remind Members that, as a candidate for membership of the European Union, Turkey will - and this is a pre-accession condition, which is an important point - sooner or later, as part of its own pre-accession strategy, have to adopt a set of policies geared towards adopting the entire acquis communautaire in good time, and including therefore all provisions already in force on nuclear safety.
Thank you for your answer.
However, I would just like to add the following.
Turkey is only looking to increase its energy potential by 2% with this unit.
Nevertheless, rumour has it that it plans to buy Candu reactors of the type acquired by Pakistan and India which were used for nuclear weapons.
In this respect, the issue requires closer examination, because the sensitive situation in the Caucasus region could heighten people' s suspicions.
My second point concerns the safety of these plants.
In areas of high seismic risk, it is not enough just to have secure, earthquake-proof buildings. Speaking as an engineer, I can tell you that we carry out tests to investigate the effects of certain risk factors in extreme circumstances.
However, we cannot carry out tests on nuclear plants which are in operation; it is just not possible.
With this in mind, it goes without saying that nuclear plants a priori should not be built in areas prone to earthquakes.
In this respect, and because Turkey is situated on the periphery of the European Union, we should be helping it to become a more secure, peaceful and cooperative country.
That is our role and this is the point of my question.
I recognise the relevance of the arguments that Mr Souladakis has put forward.
This is, of course, a highly sensitive issue.
Furthermore, it will be evident that this is a matter that does not only affect Turkey, in view of that country' s proximity to the existing territory of the European Union. It also affects other states neighbouring the EU with which we maintain relations.
We understand your concerns and will certainly take account of them, particularly during the discussions that we will be having with Turkey to define that country' s own pre-accession strategy agenda.
This question will naturally be one of our key concerns, and the European Commission will not fail to take this into account.
Thank you, Mr President and thank you President-in-Office of the Council.
I am sure the President-in-Office of the Council is a very nice man and is very kind to his wife and his children and his dog.
However, forgive me if I am a little sceptical of the reply you have just given me.
I do not believe that the statements made within the Council and the votes are available to the public immediately.
Will you please therefore undertake, before the next plenary in February, to write and tell me where I can find this information on behalf of the public, immediately the Council has passed legislation, rather than waiting for it to come out weeks later on a press release list.
Will you write to me before the next plenary with that information?
Mr Newton Dunn, I would first like to say that I do not appreciate the kind of personal comments with which you started your second question, and I would be grateful if you could refrain from making such comments in future.
With regard to what you were saying, it makes me think that the criticism levelled at the Council, apart from being formulated in a very specific way of which we also take note, does not actually refer to the opacity, shall we say, of the legislative process, but rather almost to an excess of transparency.
However, I would like to say, Mr Newton Dunn, that the results of this kind of process for transparency are quite obvious to us and we consider them to be unquestionable.
We have no problem, Mr Newton Dunn, in repeating this information to you in writing, but we will not be able to go any further than what has been said here, because that meets the requirements of the Treaty exactly.
We therefore consider that the General Secretariat of the Council is at present making available to the public all essential information regarding the Council' s functions as a legislative body.
I do not consider that the Council tried to answer my question.
I did not ask what the Council thought of the proposal which the Commission has still not tabled.
Instead, my question concerns the interpretation in principle of Article 255 of the Treaty of Amsterdam.
Does this permit legislation also to be passed concerning national laws on transparency and not only in connection with the three institutions of the European Union referred to there?
I should like to have an answer to that question.
Does the Council consider that, on the basis of Article 255 of the Treaty, national legislation on transparency can be regulated, that is to say legislation not relating to the EU' s institutions?
Mr Sjöstedt, the answer that I gave was the only answer possible.
Nevertheless, I would like to say that any interpretation of Article 255 of the Treaty must also be linked to the principle of subsidiarity.
At the moment, there are no concrete proposals which would allow us to make adjustments under this Article, and unless there is such a proposal, we cannot move forward on this matter.
In any event, Article 255 does not, at first sight, allow work to be done on any basis that could affect the principle of subsidiarity.
I am, up to a point, concerned about how the Council will fight for the principles contained in the Treaty of Amsterdam and whose purpose is to ensure that citizens have a better opportunity to participate in the decision-making process.
How is this to be done when, at the same time, the Commission' s proposal - which has been leaked, so the general public is aware of it - says that employees' freedom of thought comes before transparency and that it is not possible to have access to working documents, reports, drafts etc?
Does not the Council' s representative think that this makes it difficult to participate in the democratic decision-making process?
Mrs Frahm, the question that you raised is extremely important and we discussed it at great length during the last Intergovernmental Conference.
I would like to say that transparency does not only apply from the Community institutions "outwards" , it also applies between the institutions.
By this I mean that there are aspects of the form and procedure of the Community institutions' workings which are not accessible to the other institutions, and not only as regards the Commission' s relationship with Parliament, but also as regards the Commission' s relationship with the Council.
As a matter of fact, at the last conference, this issue was raised and discussed on several occasions.
The European Parliament will have the opportunity to take part in the preparatory group for the next Intergovernmental Conference.
The matter is still open.
Genuine transparency of the institutions' workings and the way they are presented throughout Europe is an extremely important issue and one which, in my opinion, needs to be studied again, particularly in the context of the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference.
We have no doubts about this and we think that the Members taking part in this preparatory group will have an opportunity to raise this issue again.
I believe that the Commission' s proposal should make provision for greater transparency in terms of the way the various institutions function, but I think that there is always room for improvement in this matter.
For our part, we are prepared to study any proposals made in this area.
It is a very important question indeed which Jonas Sjöstedt and others have asked.
We have a principle of transparency in Sweden which strengthens democracy and ensures that there is a worthwhile dialogue between citizens, decision makers and authorities.
We are very anxious indeed that the EU, too, should move in this direction, and this is also stated in the Treaty of Amsterdam.
One or two years ago, Parliament adopted a report by Mrs Lööw which is extremely important in this context.
The report warned that the forthcoming process would lead to restrictions upon the transparency of the Member States.
We can now see that there is perhaps some reason for this warning from Parliament.
I want to ask the Council if it understands this warning, in view of what we have now seen in the working documents from the Commission.
I listened very carefully to what Mr Seixas da Costa had to say on transparency and the Intergovernmental Conference.
My concern is, if I have understood Mr Seixas da Costa correctly on the interesting points he made as regards transparency and the IGC, whether the Portuguese Presidency will take on the commitment to tackle the issue of widening the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference.
After all, examining the issue of transparency in the ways the institutions operate should never be hidden away under any old heading or confined to some lobby or other - though I know full well the importance of these lobbies.
It should have its own heading in the agenda of the Intergovernmental Conference, which would mean widening the agenda.
Mr Dimitrakopoulos, transparency is naturally an issue of concern to the institutions.
This Intergovernmental Conference will, at the outset, concentrate on improving the way the institutions operate, particularly taking account of the desire we all share for them specifically to become more democratic, more transparent and more efficient.
All of this must nevertheless be done whilst respecting a broad framework - that of the overall acceptability of any solutions we may devise to achieve these three aims.
It is obvious that transparency will be a permanent fixture on the European agenda and it will, of course, feature on the agenda of this Intergovernmental Conference.
I can assure you that this is an issue which the Portuguese Presidency will keep before the Member States and the representatives of the preparatory group for the conference.
It must therefore be able to count on the support of the Members of the European Parliament, who will surely rally behind this proposal.
We will then see, at ministerial level, how we can follow this up.
It should nevertheless be noted that we have just concluded the Treaty of Amsterdam, which was approved last May, and that there is a raft of implementing measures on transparency which are still in progress.
The question is whether it is premature or not to start a new initiative on the subject of transparency.
My feeling is that, in spite of everything, this issue will always have to be on the agenda, because the public is clearly concerned about it, and because it is linked with the need to make the European institutions accountable to the public.
As far as we are concerned, they will be.
We shall try to achieve a consensus on this matter.
Question No 5 by (H-0785/99):
Subject: Proposal for a regulation laying down the total admissible catches for specific fish populations for the year 2000, and the case of anchovies in particular The latest reports from the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea indicate that the current level of anchovy stocks in ICES zone VIII is critical.
