The Commission is addressing a very important area, that is, commercial policy.
However, this Parliament wishes to add policies to aid development, agriculture, fisheries policy, immigration, our position in international financial institutions, the common foreign and security policy and aid for structural reform.
The Council - and Mr Luis Amado has said this this morning - has spoken on different occasions of the need for coherence - the last time, it is true, being in November 1999, and also on other occasions, such as the Development Councils of May 1999 and June 1997 - but with no concrete results.
Since the Development Council is in agreement with what he says - and this is very significant - there is little we can say, as some previous speakers have pointed out.
However, as Parliament, we wish to propose - as others have said and as the resolution states - the creation of an inter-service working group consisting of the people responsible for all the policies mentioned and the establishment of a monitoring centre for the coherence of the different Community policies, which is capable of anticipating the effects of each policy on the developing countries and amongst themselves.
What we really want, however, is to be realists and not hide away from the fact that the achievement of these objectives of coordination, complementarity and, the most complex one, which we are discussing at the moment, coherence, will require a more developed policy than the one we currently have in the European Union.
Let us hope - and we do hope - to be guided by the winds of change created by the Intergovernmental Conference, the reform of the Commission - which will also affect the development services -, this new legislature and the prospects for enlargement, to perfect a more coherent political union.
We therefore hope that the Commission, in the report it is going to present to us on global policy, will also address the question of coherence as an integral element in the efficient use of Community resources and the specific management of public interests.
Mr President, I too should like to thank the Council and the Commission for their reports and, in common with others, express my regret at the fact that coherence policy has not been given more prominence.
But we who sit here in Parliament do not doubt for a second what the reason is.
I should therefore like to discuss something more general and begin with a couple of, in my view, useful figures.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, real per capita income in the world' s richest countries was three times higher than in the poorest countries. In 1900 it was ten times higher and in the year 2000 it is 60 times higher.
And there is no sign of this trend' s being reversed.
On the contrary, it looks as if we have entered an exponential curve which is widening the gap still further. This is shown by the following figures: the income gap between the richest and poorest fifths was 30:1 in 1960, 60:1 in 1990 and 74:1 in 1997.
These figures are from before the Internet revolution took off.
In other words, there will have to be a quantum leap in development policy if the rich countries, including the EU countries, are not to surround themselves with barriers to prevent immigration on a massive scale.
In a global village, major discrepancies in the world will not, in the longer term, be tolerated by the poorest section of the village.
At some time or another, there will be a revolt, and it will be fully justified.
I would therefore urge the Council' s Presidency to set the promised debate in motion as quickly as possible and, above all, to conclude it in such a way that we all of us, including the people of Europe, realise what globalisation means and understand that a central element will have to be radical changes in the nature and the level of the development aid we provide.
The EU on average is far from providing the pledged 0.7%.
It may well be that others are worse, but that does not place us in any better a light.
Above all, however, we should give the countries concerned the opportunity to trade with us.
As far as I could hear - but I may have missed something - the President-in-Office of the Council did not mention the word "trade" at all.
I would just say to the Commissioner that I hope his proposal will be successfully adopted by the Commission and the Member States. I would also ask the Commissioner to give some concrete examples of sectoral interests which are holding matters up, not only in the Commission but also in the Member States.
I should also like to say that, in my view, what would be most effective would be for Parliament to call for proposals from, respectively, the Development Council and the Commissioner for Development. In that way, we should perhaps have a basis for discussion, instead of receiving proposals from all the governments and from all over the Commission, which is scarcely likely to produce results.
I shall conclude with a few words about the Internet revolution.
As Commissioner Liikanen keeps saying on his travels, we have a head start here in Europe in the area of mobile telecommunications.
Let us use this not only for the benefit of our own populations but also for that of the developing countries.
This technology can facilitate that necessary quantum leap forward in development policy to which I referred and, in this connection, the EU can set the agenda, leave its mark on development and honour its global responsibilities.
Mr President, "The EU' s development cooperation leaves a great deal to be desired" .
This is just a quote from a newspaper article which appeared last week, commenting on the Union' s development policy.
This is not new.
Ever since we have attempted to do something about development cooperation, its effectiveness and quality have been called into question.
Hope of improvement threatens to be nipped in the bud if the Commission keeps refusing to look into the mirror.
Why was the critical report on the coherence of development policy not disseminated externally?
One of the major conclusions of this report concerned the European policy' s internal conflict.
In terms of trade and agriculture, in particular, the European policy is in conflict with the development policy.
We seem unable to make a serious contribution to the development of the least developed countries.
This has everything to do with the difference of opinion which exists among various countries within the Union regarding development cooperation.
We should no longer view development cooperation as an instrument of external and foreign relations, but as a policy in its own right.
I advocate transparent, joint and efficient development policy.
As long as the European approach to the development issue creates more inefficiency and wastes more money, it remains appropriate to apportion a larger role to the Member States.
Finally, I would like to ask the Commission to send the document I referred to to the European Parliament as soon as possible, so that we can help think of possible solutions in a constructive way.
Mr President, Commissioner, I believe that this is an appropriate initiative and that it makes very good sense.
As various Members have already commented, we often encounter situations where there is an enormous contradiction between our intentions in terms of development and cooperation policy and the damage we inflict with our other sectoral policies, whose objectives run counter to development in those countries.
And we are not just talking about the concrete impact of our common policies, tourism, the environment, agriculture, fisheries and industry.
We are talking in general terms - and this is more serious - about contradictions between our economic and trade policies and our defence policies.
So there is a whole raft of contradictions.
In my opinion, these contradictions are not all that serious in terms of Community policies. They are, if anything, more serious as regards certain objectives and industries in some Member States.
We have to be aware of this.
We often adopt resolutions on peace processes in other parts of the world, as was recently the case with Indonesia, when we protested at the top of our voices only to discover subsequently that some European countries had been supplying them with arms and military equipment.
For me, these are the most serious contradictions in all this, more serious than the contradictions inherent in any incompatibility between sectoral policies.
We obviously know that, even within any one country, there are always contradictions between various policies.
That is a fact of life.
And we must also be aware that there will be contradictions between the various Community policies, in this case development policy.
We have to be aware that these contradictions exist and that we need to minimise them. The underlying reason for presenting this resolution is that the objective of minimising these contradictions is a fair and wise one.
I believe that it is both proper and fitting to set up a centre for monitoring this coherence between Community policies and development and cooperation policy, and that this monitoring centre' s sphere of activity should not be limited just to Community policies, but should also cover Member States' actions and policies, including the actions of economic groups, which I think are also important.
This monitoring centre should draw up an annual report on developments in these policies and on their impact and interaction.
I have left to the end a question that I regard as fundamental and which I think needs to be noted and approved by this House.
Our objective of minimising contradictions between development and cooperation policy and other policies has to be a valid objective, not merely within the European Union, but also at world level, given the increasing globalisation of the economy.
If we want fair world trade we will have to gain acceptance for this principle during the next WTO round of multilateral negotiations, because it would be contradictory if the European Union imposed a rigid but fair discipline on itself, only for the United States and the other major powers to do the opposite and to take advantage of our restraint.
That is why I consider it to be essential - and fair - for these principles to be established at the next WTO round.
Mr President, the Director-General of the DG for Development has said that to produce a report on coherence of EU policies with development policies, before this spring' s paper on development policy itself, is like putting the cart before the horse.
Never mind that the Commission' s requirement to produce an annual report, set out clearly in the Council resolution, has produced only one "non-paper" , the real problem here is that at the time of rising world poverty this particular horse is climbing uphill and the cart of other EU policies is so heavy that development policy is actually being pulled slowly backwards.
Time after time development policy is forgotten or is an afterthought when the major policies of this European Union are considered.
Take the new chocolate directive, which shows that EU countries spend more on chocolate every year than on development aid.
There has been no proper development assessment of this directive which the producer countries, 90% of which are our ACP partners, estimate could cut incomes to cacao farmers by at least 15%.
Take the fishing agreements, where we recognise the unsustainability of current fishing practices within the EU waters.
We are, at the same time, negotiating joint ventures allowing increased access for Europe' s large-scale fishing vessels in developing country waters at the expense of 190 million small-scale fish workers in those countries world-wide.
Take the trade agreements.
As Mr Nielson said this morning with regard to Lomé, preferential access is only for "essentially all the products of the least-developed countries" .
In other words, when EU commercial interests are concerned, poverty considerations go out of the window.
In the stance that we took at Seattle, why such a silence on the EU' s failure to implement the trade concessions for developing countries already agreed in the GATT, including for the crucial textile sector?
On the common agricultural policy, the biggest culprit - no development impact assessment of the Agenda 2000 CAP reforms.
Everyone now knows of the scandal of the export refund scheme which dumped 54 000 tonnes of excess subsidised beef on West African markets, slashing prices for local cattle farmers by half.
Today beef stocks stand at 300 000 tonnes.
Who will be next, quite literally, for the chop?
I welcome Mr Amadeus' statement this morning, which acknowledged the difficulties of non-budgetisation of the EDF, which called for a more active role for the Development Council and which called for development priorities to be central to the EU' s emerging common foreign and security policy.
I welcome too the Council declaration of 1992, its resolution of 1997 and successive changes in the Treaty of European Union.
Action simply has not been taken.
That is why we want annual reports, we want an annual inter-service group and we want a complaints procedure, to make sure action is actually taken.
I ask Mr Nielson, in his summing-up, to directly address those points in the resolution.
Mr President, I would like to restrict my contribution to the link between development cooperation and agriculture.
Over the past couple of years, a considerable share of the funds has been channelled towards the development of agriculture and cattle breeding in the developing countries and, more especially, the Lomé countries.
The results are certainly not what we expected.
What could be the cause of this?
I think that the cause should first and foremost be sought in the lack of clear agricultural policy in the various developing countries, barring a few exceptions.
I think that the Commission could do a great deal there to help this develop.
No farmer, anywhere in the world, will produce something if prices are too low.
The governments in the developing countries are always faced with a difficult dilemma: whom should they support, the farmers or the people in the large cities who want cheap food?
This fine balance must be struck in conjunction with the Commission, and not by the Commission on its own. In most countries where the Commission is active, development aid is also granted by the Member States themselves.
It should not be the case that the policy of the Member States contravenes that of the Commission.
It is up to the Commission' s delegations in the developing countries to assume a leading role in the development of this political dialogue and to ensure that all countries follow this line of approach.
Special attention is also required for the costs of the means of production.
Far too often, artificial fertiliser, veterinary medication and a host of other items are provided to farmers free of charge.
Once the project comes to an end after five years, the policy of free gifts also ends.
I think, therefore, that the cost element should be built in right from the outset in the policy of all projects, and as far as I know, this is not the case by any stretch of the imagination.
Finally, I wonder whether the funds could not be put to better use.
Every year, I notice in the budget of the Commission and in the European Development Fund, that they are far behind in spending the funds.
Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, we are in actual fact holding a debate amongst the converted, which is a pity.
We should really talk about coherence in the development policy in the presence of Mr Prodi, for example, who has missed a great chance right from the outset, for he has allowed the development cooperation policy to fragment over three Commissioners - and this is better than four, I have to admit - but this does not really make for a coherent policy.
We also note that, as before, there are still various DGs which stifle this policy with often very conflicting procedures and arguments.
The President-in-Office of the Council came up with a good suggestion, namely to budget the European Development Fund.
Parliament would, of course, welcome this with open arms. If this were possible, it would be a huge, historic victory.
Since Amsterdam, three terms have taken centre stage: complementarity, coordination and cohesion.
I believe that very little has been achieved in these three fields.
If a request is made for a report on the progress made on cohesion, if a request is made at all, then drafting such a report cannot be very difficult, unless one simply admits that there is no cohesion at all.
I would prefer it if a report were to be written on the present lack of cohesion, and if a systematic strategy were to be developed to reach a certain level of cohesion, for it is a long way off yet.
One thing shocked me in the speech of the President-in-Office of the Council.
He stated: "Contradictions in policy can lead to balance."
It is indeed the case that what one hand gives can be taken away by the other hand, and vice versa.
But this leads to status-quo and self-deceit, and globalisation as a whole has so far only led to changes, indeed, but changes which have only made poverty worse.
This is supposed to be our priority, would you believe.
I know that we do a great deal of good, but let us start with this very essential aspect.
Mr President, we have already noted that there is no report from the Commission, but I intend to discuss three matters in the light of the objectives which the Council presented in its 1997 opinion.
The first is concerned with conflict resolution.
For many years, I have tried, through the Council and the Commission, to find out why none of the institutions is actively participating in, and working for, conflict resolution in the Western Sahara, which is occupied by Morocco.
The UN has a peace plan.
We ought to seize this opportunity and bring the last colonial episode in Africa to an end.
I also want to take up the subject of migration.
I am anxious about the new stipulations in the partnership agreement with the ACP countries, which might make it easier to expel immigrants, asylum seekers and refugees on flimsier grounds.
I really also want to see the EU pioneer patents on living organisms.
We now know that at least one person in the world dies of hunger every four seconds.
Three quarters of those who die are children under five years of age.
This is not because of a lack of food, but because of what we have talked a lot about today, namely increasing poverty.
Food safety and the guarantee of biological diversity must take precedence over commercial interests.
I believe that patents on living organisms are designed only to control the global food supply, specifically for commercial purposes and for no other reason.
I also want to see something about women in the report I hope the Commission will produce.
Women appear to be completely absent from all areas, especially development policy when, of course, we are not in reality absent at all.
Mr President, the debate we are holding today strongly underlines the need to discuss development policy in much broader terms than are involved in simply measuring the flow of aid.
The level of aid is naturally important, and the level of aid contributed by the rich countries as a whole ought to be increased.
This ought to be done with, in particular, a view to combating poverty and through investing in the development of capacity.
However, the level of aid is only one of many instruments which significantly influence the development of poor countries.
A number of colleagues have today pointed to areas in addition to aid which are important and where contrasts and conflicts between different policy areas are very serious indeed.
The latter include trade, agricultural and fisheries policies.
Other important areas are, of course, the flow of private investments, cooperation on research and technology and the way in which the welfare state deals with, and finances solutions to, a variety of global problems which affect us all.
These problems include questions of climate, health issues, biodiversity etc, and the problems are clearly exacerbated by globalisation, that is to say the new economy which is developing.
In this economy, the connection between different policy areas is that much more marked.
In my opinion, what we are discussing here today is partly the EU' s contribution to the debate about the opportunities and risks of globalisation and about the rules there must be in order to give poor countries a decent chance.
The report, or survey, which Mrs Maij-Weggen has demanded, showing how the various policy areas fit together and what the aforementioned conflicts appear to be, is naturally quite crucial.
I cannot help but wonder why the Commission has not done more.
The Commission is new and has to be given time, but the absence of such a survey suggests that there are powerful tensions within the Commission.
I can only hope that Mr Nielsen will be successful in the forthcoming discussions within the Commission.
In addition to a report of this kind, I should like to see a more positive analysis which could be ongoing in character.
An analysis of this kind should look not only at the flow of aid but also give comprehensive consideration to all the different types of aid and transfers of resources which influence poor countries. These include technology, trade, cooperation in the field of research etc.
It should be an extremely constructive contribution to the debate we are conducting.
Finally, Parliament recommends, in paragraph 6 of the draft resolution, that a working party should be established in order to bring about coherence.
I believe it is only a coincidence, but the Commissioner for the Environment is also, of course, to participate in this group.
Let us hope that the debate in which we are now engaged will prove to have been a watershed.
Policy so far has been characterised far too much by a process of giving with the one hand and taking away with the other.
