First of all, Mr Andrews, you must understand that I do not agree with your interpretation of my colleague' s speech during the meeting of the Committee on Development. There is no contradiction between our two positions, quite the opposite.
Unless we wish to act like megalomaniacs, we cannot in the course of one presidency perform an exhaustive inventory of all possible and imaginary situations relating to all the enormous issues we face, particularly in the area of external relations.
As you can understand, it would be easy to do so.
All we would have to do is get a directory of development and put all the items in our programme, one after the other.
We are sufficiently responsible to realise that we should only include those which we will be able to manage during the term of our Presidency and - we should always be aware of this - within governments' ability to act and within the scope of the Council.
We must understand that there are limitations on what we can achieve, particularly in terms of managing national indicative programmes.
You have mentioned Ethiopia, which falls within the scope of national indicative programmes, but there are, as you know, several Community actions to combat AIDS, and in this respect, you are right, and the United States will probably not do any better.
Indeed, in terms of development aid policy, I think that Europe has absolutely nothing to worry about for the simple reason that our behaviour in this area compares very favourably with that of the United States.
Your question switched to the subject of arms, a broader policy issue which I do not think falls within the scope of this question but which the Council will, of course, address in the future, if it sees fit and if it decides to put it in a specific context.
Is the Council aware of the social problems caused by the export of food by the EU to developing countries at prices below the cost of production?
Does the presidency intend to do anything about this?
Since the author is not present, Question No 13 lapses.
I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council, and I would personally like to welcome him and the Portuguese Presidency.
Please allow me to remark on how well-versed and well-informed he is on European affairs.
Unfortunately, in my case, he did not provide what I would call a satisfactory answer.
Since the Council recognises the fact that culture is a major economic asset, it should, in my view, demonstrate this in practice.
Saying that the cultural dimension is governed by the principle of subsidiarity and that it is therefore national governments who are responsible is, I am afraid, just an excuse.
My question, which has not been answered, is why, when the European Parliament is looking to increase appropriations to fund cultural programmes within the European Union, the Council and the Commission are cutting back on appropriations and at times cutting them out altogether.
This is a true example of the Council' s indifference towards culture, despite its assurances to the contrary that it is a matter to which it attaches great importance.
I would therefore like to ask the Council if it is prepared henceforth to support culture with the same readiness as it supported bananas, hops, cows and Indian hemp.
Mr Marinos, we are not adopting a purely economic approach to managing the Portuguese Presidency, and therefore, the cultural dimension is, I am sure you will appreciate, one of our main concerns.
These cultural dimensions, however, almost always have their own economic dimension in turn, that is the level of resources which can be called on specifically to provide aid for cultural initiatives.
This is a dimension which it is difficult to go beyond within the framework of the European Union, and especially within the framework of the Council.
For our part, we shall be attempting to strengthen and consolidate the European position on cultural goods and services and on activities in this sphere, because we believe that this is an identifying feature which is crucial to the Union' s image and to the Union' s own particular identity.
This is, and will continue to be, connected with developments within the World Trade Organisation.
As you know, both we and the Council have addressed this issue appropriately.
In specific terms, we have been able to find a common language in terms of the mandate given to the Commission for the next round of WTO negotiations, at which this will be a central issue.
Nevertheless, I would like to add that with regard to cultural policy, and in particular the audiovisual dimension, the Portuguese Presidency will be paying very close attention to extending and enriching European audiovisual policy by adopting a Media-Plus programme which could go some way towards allaying Europe' s main fears.
We also intend to initiate a new debate, a more innovative one, on the issue of Europe' s film heritage, given that this must be one of the most important factors in the development of a European cultural identity and of a European audiovisual economy.
The Presidency will also concentrate on discussions about creating a digital television system in Europe, which will be the subject of a conference that we shall be organising during the Portuguese Presidency, in conjunction with the Commission, in February 2000.
But, Mr Marinos, in the EU context, culture is an issue which is repeatedly raised in connection with IGC agendas.
If, by chance, it were possible to agree to include the cultural dimension in what has been called the fifth negotiating box of the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference, then this could be suggested, both by Member States, and by the Members of the European Parliament taking part in the preparatory group.
Of course, if consensus could be reached on this issue at the Intergovernmental Conference, there might eventually be progress.
It remains to be seen whether or not there is a consensus on this.
We will soon see, and for our part, we will bear in mind any suggestions on this issue.
Mr President, I join others in wishing Portugal every good wish for a successful presidency.
I notice that you said this particular issue was not currently on your agenda for the next IGC but if some people wished it, you would consider it.
Well, I, and my fellow 35 British Conservative MEPs wish it and would like you to please consider it.
I appreciate that it is a provocative question.
It is meant to provoke because there is a very serious issue here that some countries do not hold EU law in the respect which it deserves.
We have to find some way of putting pressure on such countries to do just that so we can reconnect with our citizens.
I cannot think of a better way to do it.
Can you?
The issue is whether the European dimension will become stronger or weaker as a result of being specifically integrated into the Treaties.
This is an issue which, as you will understand, will have to be addressed at IGC level and is an issue that only a Special European Council can authorise the Portuguese Presidency to pursue, because this kind of issue falls outside the institutional framework in which the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference will take place.
Intergovernmental Conferences are a kind of event in themselves and could also be a type of Christmas tree.
It is therefore not out of the question that these issues, which crop up again and again, and which are passed from one conference to another, may be addressed.
The problem facing us at the moment is whether there is currently a consensus within the European Union on this issue being included, particularly bearing in mind that if one such issue is included, other issues of a similar nature will probably be added to the conference' s agenda.
Mr Dimitrakopoulos has the floor for a procedural motion.
I would ask him to be brief.
Mr President, I understand that I have to do this very quickly.
I liked what Mr Seixas da Costa said about Father Christmas.
In Spain they say a letter to the three kings.
I simply wish to remind you that the European Parliament has already sent a letter to the three kings through its reports.
Now the Presidency and the Council have to bring the presents which we have asked them for in our letter to the three kings.
As I suspected, it was not exactly a procedural motion, but more a closing of the debate.
We thank Mr Seixas da Costa, but he can also write his letter to the three kings.
I would merely say that the festive issue which Mr Dimitrakopoulos has raised is an extremely important one.
The problem is that in this case Father Christmas has to follow orders and therefore he can only give presents when he is authorised by others to do so.
It is not the Portuguese Presidency' s job to hand out the presents that everyone wants, especially those that the European Parliament is asking for.
After this interesting exchange of opinions, and in accordance with the Rules of Procedure, I would like to tell you that Questions Nos 17 to 27 will be replied to in writing.
That concludes questions to the Council.
Capital tax
The next item is the joint debate on:
the oral question (B5-0004/2000) by Mr Désir and others, to the Council, on the Council position on the idea of a capital tax
the oral question (B5-0005/2000) by Mr Désir and others, to the Commission, on the Commission position on the idea of a capital tax.
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Commissioner, during the Asian crisis in 1997, as with those which hit Mexico in 1995 or the EMS in 1993, everyone could see the damage caused to the economies of entire countries by financial speculation, particularly currency speculation.
Between EUR 1 500 and 2 000 billion are traded every day on the financial markets. In three or four days, this can equal the total figure of annual global production, or global GDP, of approximately EUR 6 000 billion.
The bulk of these financial transactions are purely speculative and do not involve any trade in goods or investments.
Yet the erratic movement of these massive sums of capital can, in a few hours, cause the collapse of a currency or the economy of a country, plunging its whole population into recession.
In view of this situation, renewed interest has been expressed in the proposal by James Tobin, winner of the Nobel Prize for Economics, to create a tax on currency transactions. The rate of this would be very low so that it did not affect trade in goods or investments, but it would act as a light brake on the wheels of speculation, thereby checking the multiplication of short-term transactions.
Note that this proposed tax, which seems to be producing strong emotions in some people, would be the lowest tax in the world and the lowest in the history of global taxation. Yet it would represent the recapture of the areas seized from democracy by the financial sphere.
One reason for the acceptance of this proposal, and of the campaigns by NGOs such as ATTAC, SOLIDAR or others which have popularised this proposal, is that it would release resources which could be allocated to development programmes in the poorest countries, in areas such as education or health.
It could act as a kind of asset redistribution in a world where there is both increasing wealth and increasing poverty.
Many personalities and institutions have come out in favour of this tax such as the Brazilian President, Fernando Cardoso, the Finnish Government, the Canadian Parliament last March and also Lionel Jospin in 1995.
This question has been debated in several national parliaments of the EU.
The common response has been that this tax could not be applied solely at national level and that the right platform for tackling this is the European Union. This is the reason for the oral question to the Council and Commission which we have tabled with 37 other Members.
I am delighted with the compromise motion for a resolution which we have reached with the GUE/NGL, Greens/EFA, ELDR and PSE Groups.
This motion asks the Commission to present a report to Parliament within six months on the feasibility of this tax. It also asks for an examination of the pressures and financial sanctions which could be applied against countries which encourage tax evasion or which maintain tax havens.
One of the most common objections is that such a tax would be too complex, but this could be said of any tax. If this argument had been accepted in the past, then no taxes would ever have been created.
The motion also asks that a position document, drawn up by the Commission and Council, should be submitted before the next annual meeting of the IMF.
The European Union must take the initiative and must also, as demanded in the motion, propose this initiative to the G7 because it is primarily a political question.
If the Union takes the initiative, this will have a ratchet effect because this debate is occurring all over the world, including in the USA and Japan. A desire is being expressed everywhere with increasing force that the world should not be ruled by traders but by the people, their parliaments, their governments and their democratic institutions.
Europe must play a role in this new international regulation and I am extremely happy that today, with this debate and this motion, this question is now on the agenda of European construction.
Madam President, I do not have a great deal to add on this subject.
The Council has not yet discussed the possibility of introducing a tax on movements of capital as Professor Tobin suggested.
This is a creative initiative, which we know has been welcomed by different industries across the world and by various sides in European politics, but the Commission has not yet put forward any proposal or initiative on this issue.
As it falls to the Commission to propose any such initiative, the Council has not yet been able to adopt a position on this issue.
Madam President, the revenue basis of the Tobin tax is said to be made up of very short-term exchange transactions.
Such transactions, according to the argument, bear very little relation to fundamental economic variables. This has also just been underlined by Mr Désir.
Therefore, according to proponents, such as Mr Désir, an internationally applied Tobin tax would, in principle, reduce speculative transactions and, hence, the volatility of exchange rates, which would lead to an improvement in economic prosperity.
Taking into account the considerable volume of short-term financial streams, even a low nominal Tobin tax would yield respectable sums of tax revenue.
In reality, the motive underlying the increased interest in the Tobin tax and other sources of international finance in the mid-nineties was non-economic.
Indeed, it was fuelled by the potential of this tax to generate income for international, public programmes at a time when demand for such funds was rising quickly and funding was increasingly harder to come by.
The Commission recently observed renewed interest in a global tax, such as the Tobin tax, as a means of achieving socially responsible globalisation, so to speak.
Mr Désir too has mentioned this growing interest on all sides.
But if the Tobin tax were to be applied unilaterally in order to prevent attacks on a specific currency, then this tax could not be effective and it could harm the internal financial market.
Put more strongly, in the long term it is possible that for large numbers of funds, the Tobin tax will be evaded by shifting foreign exchange rate transactions to off-shore tax havens.
In that case, the tax could lead to a net loss of total economic prosperity.
So the Tobin tax can only be effective if there is a sufficient number of industrialised countries which are prepared to participate.
Finally, even if the Tobin tax is designed to curb speculations with currencies, there is still the risk that even non-speculative streams would be affected, and that is not the intention.
For the reasons set out above, I cannot see a good reason for introducing a European Tobin tax.
At any rate, the Commission is against any attempt to restrict capital movement within the European Union.
In more direct terms, to the extent that this measure could be deemed an indirect restriction on capital streams, this would contravene the Treaty of Rome.
The correct speculative approach, it seems to me, is to remove the real causes which lead to financial chaos, rather than attempting to suppress its symptoms by introducing obstacles to the operation of the markets.
Madam President, Commissioner, I should like once again to say a few words on the modus operandi and the ideological tactics behind this oral question.
Also because I know how many social democrats in this House share our criticism, and not just the economic and financial policy experts.
We know what the problem is: instability on the markets as the result of speculation.
But the people asking the question need to know that not every instance of instability, as the Commissioner has just so impressively told us, is the result of speculation.
The Tobin tax would not have been able to prevent the crises in the EEA in 1992 and 1993 or the crises in the south-east Asian currencies in 1997.
The initiators of this question do not propose a solution; instead they are calling for a new burden, they are calling for more bureaucracy, for a measure which runs counter to the market mechanisms and they are taking up plenary' s time with an intergroup opinion which excludes the competent parliamentary committee, contrary to several resolutions by Parliament.
In my view, and I say this quite clearly, the question is ideologically motivated rather than solution-focused.
I consider this to be the wrong way forward for several reasons.
Why do we reject the Tobin tax and consider it so questionable?
First, and the Commissioner has also confirmed this, because it places a heavy burden on the capital markets.
Even a small tax would have serious repercussions on the capital markets, because this sort of speculation tax would reduce the profitability of investments considerably.
In addition, this sort of measure would also seriously hamper the development of the financial markets and would stand in the way of the principle of the free movement of capital, which is one of the central tenets of the internal market.
Secondly, speculative capital is extremely difficult to identify.
Thirdly, unless they are introduced in all countries at the same time, tax measures are easy to circumvent because there are otherwise too many loopholes.
Fourthly, technically speaking, this measure is highly impracticable and will result in a great deal of bureaucracy and administration and be impossible to control.
The measure which we should be taking is part of the resolution before us here today.
We need stronger banking supervision.
We need to clarify the liability for transactions.
We need a framework of regulations at international level.
We need to examine national laws in order to check that they comply with the rules of the Basle committee and how the dissemination of these rules can be stepped up.
I have a serious problem with one of the central points of this resolution which we cannot accept as it stands.
I refer to point 9.
Having listened to the Commissioner just now, we know that the Commission' s knowledge of the facts will result in a 'no' to the Tobin tax.
If the knowledge of the facts and this debate and the arguments are as we say, and I think that they are right, then to take up another six months of the Commission' s time and occasion uncertainty on the financial and capital markets would be irresponsible.
The capital markets do not want uncertainty from us, they want clarity; which is why we reject point 9 and call for a split vote.
Madam President, the debate on a tax on short-term financial actions is not a new one.
We have been discussing the Tobin tax proposal for twenty years and yet the question is still topical because we need really concrete and honest answers based on careful studies.
We need to know just how desirable and feasible a tax on short-term transactions really is.
This question has now entered a different dimension, a dimension in which USD 1 500 billion roam the world twenty-four hours a day looking for attractive investments, no more than 3% of which have anything to do with the real economy.
We are concerned about stability on the financial markets, not for the sake of the financial markets, but because this has to do with own growth, our own investments and our own jobs in the European Union.
We must ask what instruments we can use in order to create the order here which has been missing in the past.
We have done everything to help liberalise financial transactions, but so far we have had no working set of rules, as we have learned from the bitter lessons of the repercussions of the Asian and Latin American crises.
It is therefore high time that we thought both about supervisory regulations and about transparency on the financial markets and their information.
It is important that we know who the actors are and what their credit rating is.
We must also ask if there is not a need for fiscal justice.
At a time when the tax burden on the work factor is increasing throughout Europe and internationally, we must consider how we can achieve efficient taxation of investment income and that includes the question of how to tax short-term financial transactions.
I think that we really do need a careful report and conclusions from the Commission, so that we as the European Parliament can see if we need to ensure that the European Union achieves real international solidarity with the USA and Japan in making the economy and the financial markets more stable and secure.
This is the intention behind the question and we must then follow the ordinary procedures of reports from committees and plenary debate in order to reach a balanced and really forward-looking proposal.
Madam President, on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party, I must express my surprise at this debate on the international movement of capital and its possible taxation which, although it does not mention it in the text, appears to be an attempt to revive, as the introduction has done, the issue of the tax proposed some years ago by Mr Tobin, which our Group opposed, clearly and totally, during the last legislature, with a series of arguments clearly and coherently expressed by our President, Mr Cox.
I will have to repeat these arguments, modestly, in this intervention, because the same issue has arisen once again.
We do not agree with this type of tax because its application, in the event that it could happen, would not achieve the aims which Mr Tobin presented at the time and which the Left in this House wishes to revive.
Firstly, there is no evidence that the tax on international capital movements could reduce the dangers of volatility and instability in the international markets.
On the contrary, since it is certain that not all countries would accept it, we would open the way to speculation and fraud and that really would create volatility, instability, insecurity, opacity and unfair competition in the field of financial services operating on an international level.
Furthermore, the idea of obtaining resources to apply them to the more economically needy countries presents such complexity, when we consider their application in practice, that it appears simply impossible.
This is a false debate whose aim is purely political, and has no basis or technical viability.
