Mr President, the Seattle demonstrators argued that free trade is bad for the less- and least-developed countries, it is purely a rich country selfish interest.
Yet we might consider the rate of economic progress and the rate of eliminating poverty in countries such as India and Tanzania over the 40 or 50 years since they became independent.
There the theory went that protectionism and state intervention would preserve jobs, allow industry to adjust gradually and without pain.
It did not work; poverty became worse than ever.
The medicine may not taste too good in the short term, but opening one' s economy to competition at home and abroad forces optimal application of resources and leads to a higher standard and quality of life in the not so longer term.
Is that not the lesson of the European Union itself and of the single market in particular?
As Mr Nielson said, this is a fine example to those countries and regions aspiring to greater prosperity.
Yet preaching the benefits of free trade to the developing countries is not enough.
We also have to practise what we preach in our own accessibility for imports from these countries. Parliament' s resolution on the WTO negotiations advocated a free import policy by the EU.
Eliminating all remaining barriers to imports, tariff barriers and quotas and, just as important, non-tariff barriers, such as Mrs Maij-Weggen mentioned in her speech - eliminating these barriers would do more than any amount of development aid to secure for developing countries the economic progress which both we and they desire.
It is quite clear that a lack of coherence of development policy with trade policy diminishes our development efforts and must also diminish the political regard of the developing countries for Europe and our fine words.
Mr President, in the last couple of days we have heard fine words about the need for greater coherence, coordination and effectiveness in the external aid programmes of the Community and of the Member States.
There is one relatively small area of activity with enormous public visibility which would be a litmus test of the Union' s ability to match words with action.
I am referring to the continuing tragedy of anti-personnel landmines which present an obstacle to so many development programmes, to post-conflict reconstruction, and which ruin the lives of many of the most vulnerable in some of the poorest parts of the world, particularly in developing countries.
Over recent years the Community has spent some EUR 200 million in mine clearance, assistance to victims and related activities.
The Member States have spent similar amounts.
But there is still enormous inefficiency and a lack of will to implement a strategy agreed with other members of the international community to overcome the anti-personnel landmine problem within a finite time span.
Mr Nielson identified the problems of lack of concerted action and the need for better complementarity with Member States.
This has been talked about for years.
The Commission needs to carry out internal organisational changes, strengthen the coherence and effectiveness of its actions, ideally with a properly resourced central mine action policy cell.
It would also need more rapid contractual and implementation procedures and an enhanced multiannual budget line and much improved management of its programmes.
A proper stock-taking of the effectiveness of mine action programmes needs to take place in each of the countries seriously afflicted by landmines.
It seems to me that the landmine issue encapsulates so many of the organisational, procedural, financial management and operational difficulties which have afflicted the Commission and the Union.
Are these afflictions of the past, or will we find that in this relatively compact and limited area the European Union is still unable to meet its aspirations?
Mr President, Commissioner Nielson, the conclusion of the new ACP-EU Convention is an important step towards greater coherence.
And it is to be welcomed that criteria such as human rights, democracy, rule of law, and good governance are more firmly anchored in this new treaty than they were previously, and that earlier colonial relations no longer shape most of our relations to quite the same extent, rather, we now set greater store by these political criteria in this respect.
For these are prerequisite to any development.
If these criteria are not adhered to, then development does not stand a chance
The same goes for Cuba, Mr Modrow.
I welcome the fact that Cuba is getting closer to joining this process. But for this to happen, there are also going to have to be a few changes in Cuba.
After all, we are all familiar with the reports from Amnesty International.
It may well be that you, having belonged to one of the last Communist dictatorships, view the situation somewhat differently to the majority of people in this Chamber, and that you have problems where good governance is concerned.
Nonetheless, these are important criteria for the European Union.
There is a second issue I would like to raise.
We are discussing coherence here.
Many speakers have cited examples of the extent to which the various policies are not coherent.
In my view, however, the development policy itself needs to be more coherent too.
There is no coherence because there is still no effective coordination with the Member States and there are some projects being carried out by the Member States and the European Union in the developing countries which are very much at odds with one another.
Nor is there coherence vis-à-vis the European taxpayer when we draft a development policy which is accommodated in the Union' s budget but the EDF remains outside it.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, if in future you succeed in making this EUR 13.5 billion subject to the supervision of the parliamentary Committee on Budgetary Control, and to bodies such as OLAF, then I believe you will raise the level of acceptability.
This, to my mind, is also something that we should call upon the Intergovernmental Conference to do, i.e. establish the EDF firmly in the budget of the European Union.
Mr President, we certainly must concede that, on balance, this text is full of good intentions, but we did not vote in favour of it in committee, nor shall we do so in plenary. We had two reasons for this, both of which gave rise to amendments which I should like to explain here very briefly.
First, the Committee on Development and Cooperation advocates the communitisation of the EDF; clearly that is misguided.
In our view, cooperation is, and should remain, an intergovernmental exercise.
With Europe preparing to enlarge, communitising the EDF would make it easy to hide a lack of commitment behind the screen of the Community budget, quite apart from the fact that we would be wasting a fruitful and promising opportunity of associating our southern partners with our cooperation policy.
Lastly, the Commission has, in the recent past, had trouble managing the funds for development and humanitarian aid transparently, as Mrs Maes has just reminded us so opportunely.
Why should we add to them?
Secondly, we find it most regrettable that Mr Corrie' s report should mention the trade and development agreement with South Africa because, in the final analysis, this report is typical of the amateur diplomacy to which the European Commission is taking ever more frequent recourse.
It is perfectly astounding that the Union could have negotiated an agreement on behalf of the Member States in which a fundamental section is quite simply left blank.
And let me say in passing, it is even more astonishing that the Council allowed it to.
As a result, we are now in the absurd position of negotiating from a position of weakness on vital aspects such as wine and agricultural production within the framework of an agreement which we have already signed.
The part of this agreement which blocks negotiations could mean that the Union ends up paying producers to stop producing sherry, port and a whole host of products which are purely and simply copies under international commercial law. Imagine the potential cost of such a precedent.
It is proof, as if we still needed it, of the fact that immature diplomacy, which defends no interests, unless of course they are individual interests, and is caught between the dogma of free trade and pressure groups and more or less friendly NGOs, is not just inefficient, it is positively dangerous.
Finally, a word on the general thinking behind the Corrie report.
Nowadays, let us face it, the Joint Assembly is seen as an obstacle to free international trade by the dogmatisers in Geneva and Washington.
It was a chance to reiterate that our original and exemplary mode of cooperation with the southern countries should be developed and strengthened.
The Corrie report missed this chance and we must, regrettably, punish it for losing so much.
. (PT) Mr President, by way of both a conclusion and a summary, I would like to highlight three key aspects of this debate.
First of all, many speakers stressed that globalisation accentuates regional imbalances and social inequality, and increases poverty.
This suggests that something must be done, failing which tensions will be aggravated and conflicts jeopardising international peace and stability will arise or worsen.
Secondly, it will be important to approach development policies from a different angle in this context, taking advantage of their capacity for correcting imbalances and reducing inequality.
I believe that the importance that everyone has attached to the European Union' s role in international development policies is significant.
Everyone recognises, indeed this was the theme of today' s debate, that, if the European Union is to play a more active and leading role in development policies at world level, it will have no choice but to enhance the coherence of its own various development-related policies. I note that some speakers also emphasised that responsibility for coherence in EU policies is not a matter for the Council, for the Commission or for Parliament alone.
Quite the contrary - it will have to be the subject of a concerted effort in terms of discussion and legislative and institutional preparation, be it on the part of the Commission or of the Council, or even on the part of the European Parliament itself, and some Members have in fact already suggested that a monitoring centre or a working party could be established to monitor the impact of various policies in the specific area of development.
Finally, I would like to emphasise that it is also important - and this is one of the priorities of the Portuguese Presidency' s programme - to note the view that it is necessary to recognise the value of development in the European Union' s policies, and in particular in the context of its foreign policy.
We believe that this is absolutely vital, failing which we will be unable to take any consistent action as regards the coherence of policies, and we cannot do this without giving development policies their rightful place as an instrument for upholding the principles and values underpinning Europe' s status in the international system.
For this reason it may be necessary, as I have stressed, to change the model and move away from the post-colonial model towards a more European approach to development policies.
In this respect I believe - and some speakers here have also commented on this - that the adoption of the new convention, which succeeds the Lomé Convention, is an important instrument of renewal, and represents a new approach to a partnership with such an important group of countries from the south at a time of considerable instability in the international negotiating process, as demonstrated by the first negotiating round in Seattle.
. I sense some degree of frustration in many of the contributions to this debate.
I have given you a statement on behalf of the Commission which I think provides a useful background to this discussion.
We will furnish more detailed material relating directly to all the issues concerning coherence.
This discussion is not new.
We are currently working on it in the Commission and when that work is done I will report on it, as many have been asking if it will be possible to see the report on coherence.
I have no doubt that as a result of the increasing political attention attached to these problems - something which has clearly been reflected in the debate today - it will be easier for the Commission and the DG on Development to bring coherence to the forefront of our working agenda.
This also calls for the introduction of further new mechanisms in the Commission system which may very well include, as suggested by some of the political groups in Parliament, the setting up of a special intra-service working group and the establishment of a kind of coherence watch in the Commission.
I have read - and heard in the debate - that coherence is being used as some kind of a miracle formula that takes care of everything.
I think it is important to keep it as a relatively clearly defined discipline of trying to reduce inconsistencies where they really exist, and we certainly do have them.
Much of this has to do with real disagreement between sector interests in each and every Member State, as has been very honestly said here in this House: people more or less identify with their spheres of interest, and all this is legitimate.
I would, however, warn against the illusion that incoherence is the product of some kind of a mechanical deficiency in the system.
This exists, but it is only a small part of what we are discussing.
The major part of it has to do with well known established differences of interest between sexes and so on, and this is the problem.
Mr Mulder mentioned that no farmer will start producing anything if the price is too low.
This is true in our part of the world, but our partners and beneficiaries in Africa have a slightly different perspective.
They farm, not just for a living, but in order to live, and this makes a difference.
Subsistence farming is not based on price calculations, it is based on the hope of rain in the next season.
This does not apply to all farming in developing countries but to the poverty-focusing which we need to deliver better than so far.
From that perspective, what I am saying here is of deep relevance.
Other issues have been mentioned: cattle-farming in Namibia, tomatoes and milk powder in the Caribbean.
We should not be too masochistic.
There is a limit to how useful that is.
All these cases are characterised by the fact that they have been taken care of.
The intervention prices have been regulated, and the problems we had with beef in Western Africa and in Namibia were actually solved by reducing the intervention support.
These are real problems, but they have all been dealt with.
As regards the issue of cacao, chocolate: I repeat that the 5% has to do with creating a basis for a living in the neighbouring countries.
What we are talking about here are the local nuts which are as important to the people collecting them and making a living out of them in Burkina Faso as coconuts for farmers in Ghana.
This is not a clear case of incoherence, it is more a case of a competition between suppliers.
What was mentioned concerning sugar in the Caribbean is more complicated.
In the Overseas Countries and Territories Framework the accumulation of some of these trade aspects represents a complicated problem, but it may be that what we are talking about here has more to do with promoting the interests of some European companies than with generating income in the Caribbean. In any case, this is a matter which we are currently dealing with.
I am committed to try to create a balance in all these issues and I would mention the achievement of the trade development and cooperation agreement with South Africa.
In all modesty, I would claim that this is something that documents that the Commission is willing to walk or fly the extra mile in order to ensure coherence between the perspective of development cooperation and the perspective of trade interests.
We certainly have done our share to solve that problem, and I sincerely hope that we now will have a soft landing and a peaceful implementation in the forthcoming years of that agreement.
Finally, I thank you again for this debate.
We will come back again with material on these issues, because these problems, in one way or another, are here to stay, simply because development cooperation represents basically doing something in the world that is different from taking care of traditionally-defined trade interests, etc. We have to reconcile those different approaches.
Thank you very much, Commissioner Nielson.
I have received eight motions for resolutions tabled in accordance with Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 p.m.
Next session of UN Human Rights Commission
The next item is the statement by the Council on EU priorities for the next session of the UN Human Rights Commission on 20 March 2000.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, as you know, the European Union played an active role in the 55th session of the Human Rights Commission held in Geneva in March and April 1999.
It tabled resolutions on the human rights situation in Iran, Iraq, in the Israeli settlements, in Burma/Myanmar, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in Sudan, and negotiated statements to be issued on behalf of the chairman on Colombia and on East Timor.
For the first time, the European Union tabled a resolution on the death penalty, which was enormously successful, and led work on a resolution concerning children' s rights, which was a joint initiative with the Latin American group of countries.
The Union will continue to play this role at the 56th session of the Human Rights Commission to be held in Geneva in March and April.
In particular, as agreed at the Human Rights Council Group on 9 February 2000, the European Union intends to table draft resolutions on the Israeli settlements, Iran, Iraq, Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burma/Myanmar, a draft chairman' s statement on Colombia, and, possibly, on East Timor, together with a draft statement on the situation in various countries.
The European Union will continue discussions on preparations for the 56th session of the Human Rights Commission at the next meeting of the Human Rights Group in March.
In particular, there will be a discussion of the possibility of tabling a draft resolution on the death penalty.
To date, the group has not reached agreement on the strategy to be adopted in this respect, and in particular with regard to formulating a compromise to be tabled in the last resort in case of any amendments to the contrary, including Article 2(7) of the Charter of the United Nations, which refers to sovereignty.
We have tried to reach agreement in advance on a compromise text, in view of the difficulties that arose at the 1999 session of the Third Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, at which the Member States failed to agree on an amendment introducing a reference to Article 2(7) into the draft resolution sponsored by the European Union on the death penalty.
As you know, at the 55th session of the Human Rights Commission held last year, the United States decided, at a very late stage, to table a draft resolution on China.
This draft resolution was defeated by a Chinese no-action motion.
The European Union voted against that motion.
The European Union' s position on the approach to be adopted towards China in the Human Rights Commission was confirmed at the General Affairs Council on 21 March 1999: there was no European Union initiative on China nor was agreement reached to co-sponsor a resolution on China, but an EU vote against the no-action motion.
It is by no means certain that the European Union could have maintained a united front if this resolution had been put to the vote.
The United States of America will be tabling a draft resolution on China at the 56th session of the Human Rights Commission and are putting pressure on the European Union to support this draft resolution.
This initiative has provoked a strong reaction on China' s part: the Chinese authorities are making representations to the countries and institutions of the European Union, in an attempt to persuade them not to support the United States' initiative.
This initiative is being discussed within the Union, but with no hope of a decision in the near future.
It is in the interests of the European Union to keep all its options open for as long as possible, and in any case at least until after the EU-China human rights dialogue meeting is held on 25 February 2000.
In view of changes made to the membership of the Human Rights Commission, we estimate the vote on the no-action motion will be close.
It is therefore important this year, too, that the countries of the European Union should reach a consensus on the position to take in any vote on the resolution.
In this context it is important to note that the European Union regularly opposes requests by China that the human rights dialogue should automatically rule out tabling a resolution at the Human Rights Commission in Geneva.
The European Union unequivocally considers that although it is a very valuable instrument for exchanging views and for taking note of the overall position of the other party, the dialogue should also yield concrete results on the ground, and when this does not happen it may be necessary to present a resolution to the Human Rights Commission, potentially whilst the dialogue is continuing.
The European Union also regularly informs China that the Human Rights Commission is the appropriate body for considering human rights issues, and whether or not it agrees with this initiative, this is in any case legitimate from this point of view.
The next human rights dialogue will take place on 25 February in Lisbon, and will include seminars on legal issues and on women' s rights, and it is expected that representatives from the academic world and from civil society will take part.
The next human rights seminar will be organised by the Portuguese Presidency in May 2000, and, during the last round of the dialogue in October 1999, the Chinese side accepted the European Union' s proposal for technical assistance to support the process of ratifying the United Nations International Pact on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and the United Nations' International Pact on Civil and Political Rights, both of which have been signed by the Chinese Government.
The European Union is discussing issues on which it hopes that China will take concrete measures, and on the basis of these discussions the presidency will convey to the Chinese authorities the message that the European Union hopes China will announce positive measures at the session on 25 February.
The presidency will also present to the Chinese authorities a list of individual cases on which it intends to express its serious concern.
The meeting held in Beijing in October 1999 confirmed that, on the one hand, the Chinese authorities were willing to make concessions on issues relating to the dialogue itself, with a restructuring of the dialogue and of discussion of legal forms of repression such as the death penalty and administrative detention. On the other hand, they will not give any ground on the pivotal questions of the single party system and territorial integrity.
Discussions within the European Union about the situation in China following the outcome of the dialogue rounds in 1999 have led the European Union to decide to express its concern about human rights violations in China more firmly; the same applies to the absence of concrete outcomes from the dialogue, while recognising the positive steps that China has made on the international stage.
On various occasions the European Union has reiterated to the Chinese authorities its disappointment with the results of the dialogue, and has stressed that it hoped for better outcomes in certain more sensitive areas.
It was decided that the dialogue should continue, but in a more targeted and effective way, given that China has agreed with the European Union' s proposal to restructure the dialogue by means of better use of experts and to establish a closer link with the seminars.
Lastly, during the next Human Rights Commission there will also be a debate on rationalising the work of the Commission itself.
A working party has been set up with the express task of revising the Commission' s mechanisms. This working party has worked hard to reach agreement that it is essential to enhance the effectiveness of the present mechanisms and to make them more rigorous, especially in the financial field.
The European Union will oppose any spurious attempt to use this reform of the Human Rights Commission' s activities to limit its capacity for intervention by restricting its sphere of influence and its ongoing monitoring of all human rights issues at world level.
. Mr President, I would like to thank the presidency for the work it has done to prepare for Geneva on subjects like racism, civil and political rights and the right to development.
As the presidency said, much remains to be done, despite the understandable request by Parliament and many NGOs that the European Union should set out its position well in advance of the Geneva session.
That is easier said than done - we are still discussing some of the toughest issues.
For example, discussion is taking place about many of the matters raised in Parliament' s resolution and it is too early to predict the outcome in all cases.
It is not surprising that the debate is long and difficult.
That does not suggest any lack of commitment to the improvement of human rights but it does indicate the usual concern to get our approach right so that we really make a difference.
However, let me reflect that concern by referring to three controversial issues: the death penalty, Cuba and China.
