In this context the aim of stepping up networking between eligible zones under LEADER is very welcome.
Agriculture is one of the cornerstones of the rural environment and it must be possible for it to have a part in the LEADER initiative.
In the same way, through the LEADER initiative, structural change in agriculture can be supported by creating new jobs in rural areas.
Attention must be paid in the LEADER+ programme to all the sectors of the economy in rural areas; only a combined effort will reap an optimal result.
LEADER must now move into the implementation phase.
The operational programmes need to be approved as quickly as possible by the Commission, which implies practical and efficient administration of applications and completion of the application approval process as quickly as possible.
Five months are provided for this.
That seems to me to be rather too long.
Efforts should be made here to achieve shorter times.
Because anyone who develops a project and has it ready will also want to start implementing it as soon as possible.
Despite all the delight over the reworking of this Community initiative LEADER+, I do still have one further concern.
In its proposal the Commission called for an observatory for the LEADER+ programme without going into detail on how this proposal would be implemented.
For me this raises the following questions: who will work there?
How will these people be selected?
Where, above all, will the required money come from, and where should this observatory be located?
I do think, though, that the LEADER+ programme has not got a penny to spare on additional administrative tasks, which in the normal course of events would have to be carried out by the Commission in any case.
In addition, experience from other fields where observatories have been set up shows that, apart from rather dubiously creating jobs, they are not of any great benefit.
I would therefore call on the Commission to fulfil its monitoring duties directly itself and to do all it can to ensure that LEADER+ programmes run smoothly.
Assessment and publication are part of this, and it has of course assumed responsibility for these in the past.
Mr President, the majority of the borders, which have divided Europe for centuries, were artificially created, separating single geographic spaces and creating serious disparities in terms of balanced development and cohesion.
Our internal borders, or what remains of them, no longer cause wars, but they do continue to generate economic backwardness, social barriers and a lack of cultural communication between the peoples of Europe.
The Community' s institutions are obliged to work towards overcoming these border scars, which contradict the spirit of European unity.
The economic and social cohesion which we propose is based, by means of the INTERREG initiative, on territorial cohesion and on the integration of border areas and the outermost regions of our continent.
INTERREG has always been at the heart of a genuine Community policy for regional planning and a truly polycentric notion of our European territory.
Although the European Parliament supports this initiative, our only regret is that we have to approve a resolution on it before we have seen any evaluation of INTERREG II.
However, we are aware that we must not delay this third version further, since otherwise we would be jeopardising the success of various projects and the continuity of the projects which are currently underway. The success of INTERREG is clear and that is the opinion of the local, regional and national authorities which have participated in the cofinanced projects.
The people who have participated in this initiative have learnt the importance of learning together, of innovation, of sharing projects and good practices and of understanding and tolerating each other.
There are many interesting questions relating to it, the monitoring centre, the principle of concentration etc. However, I would like to concentrate on the management bodies.
We must create joint, interregional and transnational management bodies, in which all local and regional authorities, as well as economic and social operators, play an active role.
There must not be any repetition of cases of parallel projects on both sides of a border.
We must create a cross-border culture, and to this end we must be innovative with regard to administrative cooperation, imaginatively overcoming existing barriers and overcoming the difficulties posed by the differing levels of competence in each Member State, in each region and each municipality.
A project must never fail to be implemented as a result of difficulties in communication.
During debates in committee, we have also pointed out the difficulties involved in coordinating INTERREG with other annual or biannual financial instruments, such as MEDA, TACIS or PHARE.
This Parliament' s motion for a resolution has been very attentive to these difficulties, making proposals capable of solving them to the Commission and setting reasonable deadlines for making the necessary changes.
Mr President, my reason for wanting to contribute to this debate is because the URBAN initiative, in Ireland in particular, has been quite successful and I am keen that the European Union make a further contribution in that area.
It is a sad fact that there are many hundreds, if not thousands, of communities in the European Union suffering very severe poverty and disadvantage.
Even in Member States and cities that are extremely wealthy we have large numbers of people living in ghettos, in situations where there are inadequate facilities, where schooling is very poor, where the physical infrastructure is under-developed and where drugs and other phenomena are rife.
It seems to me that in order for the European Union to demonstrate that it has a role in helping the citizens of the European Union it must give assistance to Member States to demonstrate that the Union works for these citizens and their families.
The programme has been extremely successful in Ireland, as indeed I know it has been successful in other countries.
It was quite slow in getting off the ground there, but it was slow because it was necessary to have the local people themselves develop these programmes.
It is important that they use their initiative and their own local expertise in developing this initiative.
It would be very easy to have these programmes developed quickly and on time if you brought in outside professional experts but that would undermine the whole purpose of the URBAN programme.
I should like to make one further point before I conclude: we should insist where this money is being allocated and where this programme is being developed that it be done in the context of a serious URBAN development policy.
This, unfortunately, is not the case in Ireland.
I applaud the innovative approach of the EQUAL programme and the aim of integrating discriminated groups into the labour market.
The development partnerships are a very clever idea, even though they are experimental.
I have two major concerns, however, about the development partnerships.
They should be accessible to smaller groups, accessible for them to be able to devise, implement and monitor the programmes.
We need to have a wide element of flexibility within the programme.
I have also expressed concern in the past about the use of simple language and not using jargon, so that it becomes accessible to everyone.
I am glad to see that this was accepted into the report, but I cannot agree with Amendment No 9 because that amendment really is not expressed in simple language at all.
My second concern was that some discriminated groups have specific problems, for example, disabled people' s access to the workplace.
Projects should also specifically address this problem.
These concerns must be looked at while setting up the programmes.
I certainly intend to do that with organisations and groups in my constituency in the West Midlands.
I now turn to the controversial issue of asylum-seekers and refugees.
Although I am not in favour of those refugees who have been refused refugee status and threatened with repatriation, having access to EQUAL, I would support the possibility of access for all other asylum-seekers and refugees.
It is only fair and right for them to be able to access EQUAL in the same way as everyone else.
Thank you, Mr President. Ladies and gentlemen, with the LEADER report, rural development is very much to the fore.
This does not happen all that often and it is gratifying, especially as the LEADER programmes have been key elements in the Union' s rural development policy.
It must be pointed out that these programmes have not only been instrumental in structuring regional planning, but have also been vital instruments for economic and social cohesion in often vulnerable areas such as, for example, areas experiencing depopulation.
It must be stressed that in order to become eligible under the LEADER programme, local operators have combined forces, debated and prepared projects.
These programmes have, therefore, been important channels for participative democracy, the rationale of the citizen for Europe.
So, the concept for LEADER+ should retain all the positive aspects of previous programmes.
One urgent question is therefore raised: why, when this programme has been successfully run for ten years, is LEADER+ still classed as experimental?
Are there so many other European schemes which can boast 800 specific original experiments which were particularly successful?
For how much longer is the Commission going to leave LEADER at the experimental stage instead of bringing it online as part of the general concept of mainstreaming of rural development?
Moreover, I wonder at the reduced guidelines to which the Commission wishes to restrict LEADER+.
At a time when, Commissioner, after Seattle, we Europeans are fighting on the grounds of multifunctionality in rural development projects, why should we confine ourselves to a few limited criteria with resources that are far from sufficient?
As an ecologist, let met tell you that the precautionary principle and sustainable development require much more diversified and many-sided approaches.
In this connection, the Commission is proposing to limit yet further the cooperation actions of local action groups to only candidate countries.
A better solution would be, as indeed the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism suggests, strengthened coordination between LEADER+ and the Community cooperation and partnership programmes, such as INTERREG, PHARE, SAPARD or MEDA.
The fact is, showing solidarity with Eastern Europe, is all very well, but it is not enough.
The tradition which has already been established by the previous programmes with the countries of the south, particularly the countries around the Mediterranean, must not be abandoned.
Therefore, once more, we can stress that what the area of agriculture and rural development really needs is codecision. Codecision would give us effective means to progress programmes of this type, which require cooperation and cross-disciplinary application.
Mr President, I have a few very brief comments.
We are debating the planning phase and guidelines for the four Community initiatives without access to any substantive and complete appraisal of the previous period. This is not very good at all.
Programmes and objectives usually turn out to be far too ambitious and their results are not always satisfactory, while the lack of transparency and complexity of the plans often allow considerable scope for mismanagement and even fraud.
The Community initiatives we are debating could play a positive part subject to certain preconditions.
They must, however, not be subordinated to the objectives and aspirations of a more generally negative economic and social policy, but must develop their own self-sufficient role.
For example, adapting EQUAL to the objectives of employability and the flexibilisation of labour relations transforms this initiative into a new version of local employment contracts.
Extending the LEADER initiative to every area in the Union entails the risk of marginalising deprived areas even more, to the benefit of more developed areas.
The INTERREG initiative must include eligible areas with special emphasis on border areas, islands and both mountain and non-mountain areas, such as the prefecture of Arta in Greece, whose omission from Annex I of the Commission' s communication is ill-considered.
Mr President, rural development has been identified by this Parliament and the Commission as a priority policy area, and I would like to welcome here today the Commissioner responsible, Commissioner Fischler.
Our response to rural decline has come late in the day, but I suppose better late than never.
Family farming is now recognised as central to the European agricultural model and is an objective to be addressed, certainly within the time-scale of Agenda 2000.
In my view the next five years will decide the future of thousands of marginal family farms.
It behoves all of us to do everything possible to ensure their survival.
As the Commissioner knows, farming alone will not be sufficient to ensure the sustainability of rural communities.
For this reason we need the coordination of all policy areas capable of impacting positively on rural development.
In this regard LEADER has established itself as an effective development initiative.
It provides the opportunity for local communities to identify their development potential and become actively involved in addressing those problems.
The voluntary participation of people in development programmes is something that is not always fully appreciated.
Yet, through LEADER, there can be no doubting its effectiveness as an integral part of broader EU and national policy.
In conclusion, while welcoming Commission approval for LEADER+, I am concerned about the time delay between the ending of LEADER II and the commencement of the new programme.
I urge you to look seriously at this problem.
A break in continuity will have serious consequences for the programme and certainly a disruptive effect on voluntary and professional workers.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, having read the Commission communication on the INTERREG III initiative, and pointing out that I took part in the vote on Mr DecourriÚre' s report within the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, I should like not only to expressly reiterate our agreement in principle with the initiative as presented and, particularly in the context of INTERREG III B, with the Commission' s recognition of activities contributing to the restoration of landscapes run down due the level of prices in the agricultural sector, a sector in which many associations, especially cynegetic, are already making enormous investments in my own country.
I should also like to give my considered support to the comments of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, particularly and primarily in deploring the failure to integrate the most remote regions into strand A of the programme or in commenting upon the lack of precision in the selection criteria for the implementation methods for strand III C and, finally, in requesting that Members of the European Parliament should be involved in the European Observatory for cross-border, transregional and interregional cooperation.
I should further like to express major reservations with regard to the exaggerated tendency which, in the Commission communication with reference to INTERREG III and III B, involves associating environmental protection exclusively with the development of Natura 2000, which I think is often an excessively abstract means of safeguarding ecosystems, from which users are in danger of being excluded or severely restricted.
Finally, if the Commission and the relevant Councils of Ministers permit, I should like to stress that the Members of the European Parliament should be given more information on the procedures relating to the implementation of the INTERREG projects and, beyond that, of similar initiatives.
It would be even better if they were involved to a greater extent in the processes of framing and implementing the programmes concerned, otherwise it will be difficult to determine and defend their role in relation to the local and national authorities and even the citizens.
Mr President, first of all, I would like thank the rapporteur of the EQUAL report, Mrs Stenzel, very warmly for all the efforts she has made to master this very complex subject matter on behalf of all of us.
EQUAL is a very difficult programme because it attempts to combine so many old programmes and yet aims to view them in a different light, doing so with less money than was available in the previous funds.
This is an arduous task.
Only, the number of people affected by these programmes has not really dropped.
This is why it is so hard to strike a balance, not only between the different countries or the different components, but especially between the different groups listed in the programme, and in fact this is what has preoccupied us to date.
Comments are made here and there to the effect that one group should get more funding than another.
I, for my part, have focused on the position of the handicapped and the elderly within the framework of the programme, and I have to say that their position could well have been overlooked altogether if it had not been for the European Parliament devoting special attention to them.
Although a few other groups have been mentioned, it is the Member States, in particular, which are on the lookout.
For example, I know of one Member State that would like to use a large proportion of the entire programme for one component, namely refugees.
I would, therefore, ask the Commissioner to ensure that a balance is struck between these different groups.
It should not be the case that one Member State, under the pretext of calling on the subsidiarity principle, can decide that all funding should go to one group.
I think that this will have to be monitored closely because otherwise we will end up in that situation against which Mr Meijer has warned us so vehemently, to wit, that vested interests will emerge and that people will think that the money is theirs to spend.
This is not the case!
It has to be redistributed time and again.
It should be used for innovative projects and it should not completely disappear into the Finance Minister' s treasury funds.
That is not the intention and that is an important point that we need to bear in mind here.
I believe that the remaining problems that we have faced within this Parliament, and which in large part stem from the fact that it is so difficult to strike the right balance, can be solved.
As far as the Commission is concerned, I hope it will be able to join in the compromise that is being concluded here in this Parliament, mainly with a view to reaching a balance.
I would just like to underline this - the situation is, of course, a little precarious - Parliament has, for the sake of convenience and safety, placed the EQUAL programme on the back burner for the time being, so that Parliament has yet to be persuaded of the way the funds are to be distributed.
I believe that this is actually a good thing.
The position of Parliament in this whole procedure is somewhat unclear.
The Rules of Procedure do not shed any more light on the matter and that is exactly why this back burner is extremely useful.
Mr President, there is no doubt that the INTERREG initiative promotes efforts to achieve economic and social cohesion in the European Union.
However, I should like to stress INTERREG' s particular importance for the Balkan area, where political developments and hostilities over the past few years have had major economic repercussions for neighbouring countries and especially for my own country, Greece, which is the only Member State on that long-suffering peninsula.
For Greece, for the neighbouring countries Italy and Austria, but also for Europe as a whole, the social and economic restoration of the Balkans, bringing political stability, is a vitally important matter.
So far, some Balkan countries have received aid from the PHARE and Obnova programmes, while others have not.
During the new programme period, in view of enlargement and bearing in mind that funding has been provided for from new financial instruments and regulations, such as ISPA and Sapard, it is considered absolutely essential to coordinate the funding of all three strands of INTERREG with other financial aid to third countries.
Accordingly, we welcome the related references in Chapter 7 of the European Commission' s proposed general guidelines for INTERREG.
The efforts to coordinate the planning and so make it more effective must extend to all the programmes equally, and I say that because in the MEDA programme during the last period some problems arose which have to be overcome, so that we can have equal treatment for all the third countries participating in that programme.
I should like to end by saying that the planning of the new inter-state cooperation zones has taken no account of the Mediterranean' s geographical peculiarities, which would justify the creation of a special zone for coastal and island regions.
We therefore ask the Commission to pay special attention to the issue of maritime and island cooperation when zone planning next comes up for review.
I end by stressing the need for the European Union to persist with such initiatives, which strive to eliminate inequalities between our regions, and to foster their harmonious development.
And since this is St. Valentine' s day, as a former Mayor of a regional city, I propose that we should all declare our love for all the European regions which need that love.
Mr President, Commissioner Fischler, rural development can and must tackle the problem from three different angles: preservation of jobs, stewardship of the countryside and, not least, local culture, because that is of the utmost importance.
Only if the population can stay in the countryside will the quality of life in the countryside also be permanently assured.
We can observe the consequences of migration from the countryside in several areas of the Alps and they are devastating.
But I warn against using these programmes to take urban culture to the countryside.
And neither should we create structures which are reliant on subsidies and which will be dependent on them forevermore.
To really guarantee sustainability - a buzzword which has, since it gained new currency, become relatively devoid of meaning, but we all know what we mean by it - what is needed, amongst other things, is an integrated approach in the countryside towards, for example, tourism and agriculture.
The investment needs to be visionary.
Young, creative individuals must be made to feel an attachment to the countryside. If they all leave then nothing much will go on there any more.
None of us think much of the principle of indiscriminate, all-round distribution, and the pilot projects need to act, as it were, like avalanches and trigger other similar projects.
I would be in favour of supporting self-contained cycles of projects and, even though LEADER I and LEADER II may have had shortcomings here and there, overall they were certainly positive.
I should like to ask that we consider granting derogations not only in the Nordic countries but also for mountainous areas - the Alps, the Pyrenees and the Sierra Nevada, from where I have just returned - in respect of population size and density.
Mr President, I want to talk about the EQUAL report, especially the issue of the policy on refugees.
Last week, we had a very impassioned discussion about the formation of the Austrian Government.
Today, we are already discussing the Austrian coalition government' s policy on refugees because Mrs Stenzel, who is the author of the EQUAL report, of course represents Austria' s governing conservative party and its policy.
The most startling aspect of her original report was that she wanted to limit aid to the small group of refugees covered by the Geneva Convention, that is to say so-called quota refugees or UN refugees.
