No political cohesion has so far come about, not even in the fight against organised crime, or in defence of the victims of genocide; we do not have a currency that is even remotely stable or an economy which really does combat unemployment and poverty; but it only took one minute of iconoclastic fury to destroy the Union' s credibility.
Sanctions can be imposed after the Treaties have been violated, but cannot be applied if a democratically elected party enters government.
Otherwise, how will we deal with Communist countries which return to Communism: will we throw them out of the Union too if Communists enter into government, or will Stalin' s grandchildren be forgiven for everything?
(Applause from the right) It is via diplomacy, persuasion, knowledge, and solidarity, and not with threats or via anti-constitutional means that the institutions can ensure respect for themselves and for principles.
Bilateral relations involve the States, so the 14 do not come into this.
This is riding roughshod over the European institutions in order to defend political ways of thinking, with an incompetence worthy of parties which have just emerged from totalitarian regimes. It is not what you would expect of the representatives of democratic traditions.
So many things set us apart from Mr Haider - as we have often written - including his claim to the completely Italian Alto Adige region.
However, we already knew this.
However, today we are concerned to learn that other representatives of the Union seem to have turned their backs on the Union' s democratic role.
We support legality and democracy as expressed by the peoples, and favour upholding national sovereignty as long as this does not violate the principles of the Treaty or human rights.
We believe in Europe, while it seems that others have started the process of breaking up the Union.
This is what has come of rushing headlong into enlargement and not clearly defining roles and tasks.
We have built a Europe with an unstable market, not a Europe with principles, rights and politics.
And these are the consequences!
Therefore, we can but call on the Commission to continue to show restraint and praise those who are working to safeguard the independence and sovereignty of the Austrian people, thereby ensuring that this people retains its freedoms and maintains good relations with other peoples.
Madam President, today we have an appointment with hypocrisy.
Here we have a Council which has managed to flout the treaty and employ a method completely unrelated to Articles 6 and 7 which make it possible to condemn a State in the event of a serious and persistent breach.
In the event there is absolutely no serious and persistent breach in Austria.
There are risks, as we are all aware, but in the event there is absolutely no serious and persistent breach.
If we were to apply the criteria of Articles 6 and 7 or the Copenhagen criteria to the European Union, then, most certainly, this European Union could not become a member, although the countries of Eastern Europe are required to meet them.
And if we were to speak of serious and persistent breaches, then perhaps we could mention some Member States, such as Italy and France, first and third, respectively, in the list of countries condemned by the Council of Europe and the Strasbourg court.
We could mention, my Belgian friends, Belgium and the Dutroux case, the dozens upon dozens of children kidnapped, tortured, raped and murdered by leading personalities in this country, where inquiries are bogged down, making no headway.
We could, if one third of the Members of Parliament so requested, require that the Council and the Commission look into the matter.
We could ask ourselves why the Austrians are rejecting 10 years, 13 years of party politics which has made one country - Austria - corrupt and rotten, just as it is now corrupting countries such as Italy, Belgium and other European Union Member States.
We might well wonder why 76% of Belgian citizens have no faith in the justice system in their country or why 56% of French citizens have no confidence in their country' s system of justice, and 53% of Italian citizens have absolutely no confidence in Italian justice...
(The President cut the speaker off)
Madame President, my group, the EDD, and especially my party, are very concerned by this debate.
We cannot, and we do not, support in any way the sentiments and politics of Herr Haider and we deplore his references to the Third Reich.
We also, however, deplore the fact that your Parliament should consider interfering in the policies of an elected government of any country, especially one which is part of the European Union.
My party at home are certainly not racists, but we do not accept the rule or interference of the European Union very well.
Are you going to interfere with Great Britain' s Parliament if we are elected?
Madame President, the people of Austria have spoken by electing Herr Haider to their Parliament.
I believe they gave him 28% of the vote so there is going to be a coalition government.
Your Parliament, may I suggest, Madame President, should wait to see if the party of Haider has an effect on the policies of that country.
Then, and only then, might you consider if human rights are affected.
Your Parliament may consider measures appropriate to counter that situation and then, Madame President and only then, may your Parliament consider interfering in the constitutional affairs of a country of the European Union.
Madam President, as a representative of the Freedom Party, I respect the concerns some of my fellow MEPs have with regard to the democratic developments in Austria.
My reaction may come as a surprise when I say that I personally am at a loss as to the heightened sensitivity displayed towards Austria in matters of respect for human rights, having a sense of responsibility for one' s own past, and the stability of democracy.
Austria must take the responsibility on its own shoulders for the often dubious image other countries tend to have of it, rightly or wrongly.
The refusal of our government, down through the years, to acknowledge our complicity in the horrors of the Second World War, together with their refusal to properly compensate the Jewish victims and those forced into hard labour, have done a great deal to bolster this negative image.
This FPÖ has now entered into a coalition with the ÖVP, due to the outcome of elections held on 3 October 1999, when the previous government was voted out of office.
This is the citizen of a state' s prerogative, for it is the founding principle of a democracy.
When the talks between the SPÖ and ÖVP broke down, the Socialists attempted to form a minority government and asked the FPÖ for their support.
We were offered three ministerial posts - you can read it for yourself in the newspapers - the very party that is being denounced as fascistic here!
When we suddenly refused this offer, an inflammatory and rabble-rousing propaganda campaign began that is beyond our comprehension to this day.
The FPÖ party is established in Austria' s political landscape.
The head of the government of one of the nine provinces belongs to this party and it is involved in all the other provincial governments.
What many Austrians are wondering today is why their democratic decision has suddenly been interpreted as an expression of a fascistic cast of mind, and why the campaign did not begin until the Freedom Party rejected the support of a minority government comprising the SPÖ?
There is prejudice at work here, which - without going into our programme - is reducing the darkest hour of European history to a political spectacle.
I am filled with disgust when certain of our opponents get mileage out of the millions of deaths that took place in the gas chambers of the concentration camps as cheap propaganda, as, for example, the Italian MEP Bertinotti did yesterday on Italian TV when he accused Mr Haider of denying the holocaust.
Shame on you Mr Bertinotti!
You might have run out of political arguments but that does not give you the right to use those who were murdered as cheap propaganda.
Denouncing a democratically elected politician as a Nazi does not make you an anti-fascist!
On the contrary, you are deriding the true victims of National Socialism and playing down what the fascist dictators did.
Your behaviour stems from your own prejudices, you are dispensing with any form of political debate and you are displaying precisely the kind of behaviour you claim to oppose.
The attacks against Austria' s new government and the attempts to exert political influence in a Member State are an insult to the Austrian people.
That is why we are indebted to the Commission for taking a stance that separates it from the rest.
The new coalition agreement is about reforming a democracy, the rights of the opposition, commitment to compensating those forced into hard labour....
(The President cut the speaker off)
Madam President, to begin with, I would like to make one thing abundantly clear: Austria is not in danger of experiencing a resurgence of a one-party system or of a totalitarian system of right-wing persuasion.
Austria is a stable democracy; one in which human rights and fundamental freedoms are guaranteed under the constitution and are afforded the protection of an independent judiciary.
Austria is a cosmopolitan country and xenophobia and discrimination have no place there.
There is nothing unusual about what is happening in Austria: there has been a changeover of power following democratic elections, in consequence of which an old system was voted out and a stable parliamentary majority prepared to carry out the necessary economic and social reforms was sought and found.
There will be a functioning majority and likewise a functioning opposition.
The Austrian People' s Party, which I represent here in this Parliament, used to be and still is a party that has consistently spoken up for the integration of my country into the EU and feels deeply attached to the community of values that is the European Union, and likewise its basic political principles of deepening and enlargement.
We respect and accept the discussion that is taking place and also appreciate the concerns that are being voiced in many of our Member States as to the way ahead for Austria.
Our understanding springs from the knowledge that our history of the recent past has bequeathed to us a political responsibility of special importance in the present.
Our country was not just the first victim of the Hitler dictatorship, many people were perpetrators too, although I refute any suggestion of collective guilt.
The ÖVP played no small part in helping Austria find its way into the European Union.
My country' s place is not outside the European Union but in it ...
..., with all the rights and commitments that this entails!
Any future government must therefore be judged according to the values and principles it professes to in its manifesto, and not according to the prejudgements put about both by political adversaries and the international media.
A declared belief in human rights, democracy and the rule of law, in an honest reappraisal of Austria' s role in the past, in passing on information on the gravest crime against humanity in the 20th century, the holocaust, will also be reflected in the fundamental accord underlying a future coalition government between the ÖVP and FPÖ.
My party can be relied upon to see to it that my country holds firm to the course of European politics and continues to be rooted in the European community of values!
(Applause)
Madam President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, Representatives of the Commission, it is a black day for Austria and for Europe.
Not even Mr Sichrovsky' s web of lies or Mrs Stenzel' s words of appeasement can do anything to change that.
For the day has dawned: two irresponsible politicians, consumed with a lust for power, are selling Austria' s image, political role, and to some extent even its economic interests, down the river!
(Applause, heckling)
They are trading this in for a head of government' s position and for membership of a government.
They are just as prepared to take on board the fact that Austria will go from being a revered country to a reviled one, as they are its threatened isolation and thus to some extent that of its citizens.
I believe - as do many who for years have campaigned against Haider and his brand of politics, and especially my colleagues in the Social Democratic delegation in this Chamber - that the various measures announced by the international community, insofar as they do not have any bearing on the government and its representatives, are grave and also inappropriate.
However, my criticism - and I freely admit this - my rage, is directed exclusively against those who have provoked these reactions and continue to do so, Messrs Schüssel and Haider and their parties, ...
... and that includes their representatives in this Parliament.
Mr Poettering, it is interesting to note that you are in almost as difficult a position as I am, albeit for different reasons, for you are having to defend something that goes against your convictions.
You are having to defend a certain Mr Schüssel, you are having to consort with Schüssel as he is today and who, as I understand it, was recently told not to come to the representatives of the Christian Democratic party' s summit meeting.
The argument that Mr Poettering himself used has come into play, i.e. that it would only be possible to deprive Haider of his mystique if he were to be integrated into the political system.
However, in my view, he will be no more able or willing to be integrated into this, into our political system, and into the Europe of today, than any other extreme right-wing movement.
Anyone who feeds on prejudice towards foreigners and ethnic minorities and gives succour to these prejudices, whose programme features parochialism and anti-liberalism, who displays loutish behaviour and arrogance in their international relations, and who has never yet distanced themselves clearly and unequivocally from National Socialism, has neither the intention nor inclination to integrate!
(Applause)
This historic weight of guilt falls on the shoulders of the Conservatives for having consorted with the wolf of their own free will and waiting to be devoured.
That is how the wolf - albeit on account of the self-sacrifice of the ÖVP - is sustained rather than kept in check.
I understand that Europe and the civilised world wants to have as little as possible to do with such a government.
However, by the same token, there is another Austria, the one where umpteen thousand people demonstrated against the FPÖ having any involvement in government, and who will continue to demonstrate against this government.
I urge you to support this Europe and to support and help this Austria!
(Applause)
The more powerful this Europe becomes and the more vigilant it is towards authoritarian tendencies in the Europe of today, the more successful we will be in striking at the roots of right-wing extremism.
For Europe is and will remain the most potent guarantee we have against xenophobia and demagogy, or even against a relapse into barbarism.
Please support the Austrian people against this government!
(Applause)
Madam President, this is an historic moment, as it is now, at last, quite clear to us all that the European Union has gradually developed into a community of values.
We see this, now that the government of one Member State is being joined by a party which, as is known, does not respect all these values.
I would also like to say that the position of the fourteen states emanating from the Council was justified, as in a way this is also a matter of the composition of the government of the European Union, meaning this is also a matter for the Council and not merely an internal affair of Austria' s.
As Members of Parliament, we must pay particular attention to the fact that the work begun to establish fundamental rights is more important than ever.
It is more important than ever that respect for, and non-violation of, human values and the rights of minorities, including the rights of all those who live within the territory of the European Union, form an essential component in the rule of law principle of the EU, and, for this reason, the Charter of Fundamental Rights must be made legally binding.
It must not be allowed to remain a mere declaration.
As important is the fact that Austria' s forces of democracy should be given support, as none of us wishes to isolate the country.
We know that most Austrians respect these values.
They have also shown how they feel: not all the demonstrations have taken place outside Austria.
Doubtless there are also a lot of protest voters on the scene that have wanted a change in Austrian policy for a long time.
I believe Parliament should support these forces of democracy.
I also appeal to the Austrian President, that he might yet look into all the possibilities for forming a government made up of democratic forces.
Madam President, I would simply like to stress the value of the attitude that the leader of our group, Francis Wurtz, reminded us of just now.
I welcome the statements by the Presidency of the Council and the position of the 14 countries which have rejected official contact with an Austrian Government that includes Jörg Haider' s party.
The fact that we are stressing this is all the more important because, as you know, we essentially disagree with the policies made by Europe, with its economic and social policies, its democratic deficit and the Member States' involvement in the terrible war in the Balkans.
Our normal disagreement further emphasises our appreciation today: this is extraordinary because the danger of a resurgence of an irrational, neo-nazi element in Europe is extraordinary.
This danger does not concern Austria, it concerns Europe.
We are talking about us, not Austria.
We know the social causes which contribute, along with unemployment and instability, to fuelling tendencies towards this; we know the accompanying cultural causes - xenophobia, racism - but with the inability and unwillingness of these extreme right-wing groups to settle accounts with nazism, we cannot fail to point out the possibility of an explosive mixture being created in Europe.
Not only the Alpine region, but all our countries are involved: the conditions are being created whereby democracy and European civilisation may once again come under threat.
The position taken by the presidency has shown that it is aware of this tragedy for civilisation.
Europe is showing that it has not forgotten Auschwitz; Europe is coming face to face with the suffering of the past.
Now, though, it should follow through with its actions, and the first to follow through should be the Commission, which, however, has been obscure and weak on this, making the value of the presidency' s position even more apparent.
This is the change we must impose on the Commission' s action.
Madam President, despite the fundamental democratic principle of the respect for human rights and the freedom and sovereignty of peoples, which opposes fascism, nazism or communism, both new and old, and despite all the previous speakers talking about the sovereignty of the Austrian people, we are today witnessing this sovereignty being denied by Parliament.
In the manifesto of the Austrian Democratic Freedom Party, there is nothing to justify the accusations that it is attacking the principles of freedom, democracy and respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms or the rule of law, enshrined in Article 6 of the Treaties.
I would, however, like to draw your attention to the fact that the President-in-Office, who has been so critical of Austria, has recently consigned the inhabitants of Macao to the sovereign rule of the People' s Democratic Republic of China.
Perhaps, in order to strengthen the Union' s democracy, it would now be appropriate to isolate Austria and criminalise a party that was democratically elected by the Austrian citizens, while bringing Turkey and its "Grey Wolves" into Europe.
Madam President, we are debating an extremely serious issue.
We are debating nothing less than the presence in a Member State' s government of a political force whose doctrine and principles are incompatible with the conceptual and moral bases of the Union enshrined in its founding Treaties.
A simple reading of chapter 4, article 1 of the Austrian Freedom Party' s manifesto is enough to make any democratic conscience shudder.
The view that ethnicity is the defining factor of a nation and the claim that one ethnic group has superiority over others, as is written here, revives old ghosts of the century which we have just left behind, which some historians have described as the century of horrors; horrors which the unacceptable philosophy behind Mr Haider' s manifesto has stirred up once again, to our amazement.
Of course Austria is a sovereign nation and of course we must respect the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of a Member State.
However, that is not the problem.
The question is whether the Union can remain indifferent to the formation of a government in a Member State which includes such a party.
Our answer to this crucial question is no.
Leaving aside strategic and tactical considerations, leaving aside possible exonerations based on other people' s behaviour and above and beyond party and electoral interests, the Spanish delegation of the People' s Group of this Parliament, in full agreement with the Spanish People' s Party and the Spanish Government, clearly expresses its full agreement with the statement of 31 January by the Portuguese Presidency of the Council.
We agree with its substance, its tone and its scope.
(Applause)
Konrad Adenauer once said - and he knew what he was saying - that the surest way to pacify a tiger was to allow it to devour you.
History is a compendium of events which could have been avoided.
Therefore, Madam President, the Union and the Assembly must send an unequivocal message, rejecting of the tiger of intolerance, xenophobia and totalitarianism, so as not to add one more mistake to the long list of abdications, renunciations and opportunism which mark Europe' s past and for which we have paid such a heavy price.
(Loud applause)
Madam President, the European Union was built upon the idea 'never again' , meaning never again do we want to see xenophobia, concentration camps, anti-Semitism, heightened nationalism or war.
The one and only significance of the European Union is the will to transcend the atrocious history of the twentieth century which gave the coup de grâce to any ideal of humanism within the heart of Europe, and which is still highly topical today.
It is not true to say that, when a government forms an alliance with neo-Fascists somewhere in Europe, this is merely a question of national sovereignty.
For this Union of ours is not a grouping of neighbouring nation states who are simply coming to mutual arrangements to improve their collective circumstances.
It is a Community that is destined to exist, in which, when the main thing is under threat, when values are under threat, all democrats must bend over backwards to find solutions to ensure that the mistakes of the past are never made again.
Let us learn the lessons of the past.
In the thirties, when Adolf Hitler was democratically elected, although with a minority, many people thought that it was not as bad as all that and, Mr Poettering, in France, a number of men and women, on the right wing but perhaps of other political persuasions too, thought, 'Better Hitler in France than the Front Populaire.'
