In the final analysis, water protection is not just a social question, it is a decisive social question, which is why the polluter pays principle must be applied more rigorously as otherwise we all bear the consequences.
Given the advanced state of pollution of water resources, it is important not just to maintain the status quo but to ensure during the vote tomorrow that we achieve genuine quality improvements.
Mr President, it must be some six years ago now that Mr Karl-Heinz Florenz, assisted by Mrs Ursula Schleicher, put in a request and managed to overhaul the water policy in its entirety.
It is not an easy topic and, in my opinion, the efforts made by Mrs Lienemann are very laudable indeed.
The decision-making process concerning this framework directive on water has reached a crucial stage.
The topic has been brought under the codecision procedure and as a result, we have been able to draft important, more stringent legislation as early on as at first reading.
In fact, the common position which was issued at the end of last year was already a major improvement on the original proposal.
It is also very hard to adopt policy in this respect because the discrepancies are so huge.
I would also address the Spanish Member in this respect: in the North of Europe, we often face floods, but also polluted water, from industry, whilst the problem facing the Members in the South is often related to transporting water over long distances, simply to supply drinking water or water for agriculture.
I would like to enter into the two elements of this topic in more detail.
I would first of all like to focus on quality.
The Netherlands is significantly affected by the European water policy.
A very important component, to wit, one third of our drinking water, is extracted from surface water in the Netherlands.
The Netherlands is located downstream, in a delta, which means that the quality of the surface water which heads our way is of key importance.
Another important point of discussion is the standardisation of water quality.
In a number of amendments, the proposed standards and especially the OSPAR standard for 2020 are called into question.
Although I understand that, according to some, this standard is unclear or that it cannot be defended judicially, I do believe that we have to support it because we could then provide more precise standards in a conciliation procedure.
I would now like to say a few words on quantity management.
In his poem "Herinneringen aan Holland" [ "Reminiscing about Holland" ], a famous Dutch poet mentioned water too, which, with its never-ending trail of destruction, was feared and respected.
In 1953, we suffered an enormous flood at a time when we were able to play a pioneering role in terms of dam technology.
When our rivers flooded in 1990, we established that installing artificial works upstream affects the water-storage capacity downstream and can cause a great deal of damage.
This means that in terms of quantity management too, we need to put in considerable effort to ensure that life upstream and downstream is not affected by it.
Mr President, I too would like to start by congratulating Mrs Lienemann on her excellent work.
Water is a basic necessity of life and a fundamental right.
Everyone should have clean water at their disposal but the availability and good quality of water is not so self-evident, as many have experienced in Southern Europe and are experiencing now in the Danube countries too.
Water is often a source of conflict between countries and peoples.
This is why it is important that water becomes subject to international coordination.
We need to recognise that water is a joint liability.
Cooperation within a catchment basin must be self-evident.
Too little operational capacity upstream or, in fact, excessive use, can cause problems downstream.
Coordination is the key word here.
The problem of water is becoming increasingly topical.
Changes in the climate and minor rises in temperature have a direct impact on precipitation.
Some areas are becoming drier, whilst many are becoming wetter.
It is time for action.
In March, the Second World Water Forum will be held in The Hague.
This Forum stands for a worldwide vision.
This vision must translate into regional action plans for sustainable water management and water control.
The time for action is upon us.
The European Parliament must now opt for a sustainable water policy as a starting point and remain realistic at the same time.
But we should not lower our standards too much either.
The common position is not ambitious enough.
This is why it is necessary to refer to previous international agreements, or the OSPAR objectives.
We need to aim for dangerous substances to be phased out by 2020.
This has been agreed for the marine environment and it is obvious that this agreement will also apply to other waters too.
The OSPAR objectives are now being drawn up.
A list has been compiled, containing 400 substances which produce clear risks for the environment.
It is both technically and economically possible to reduce the emission of these substances to virtually zero and we need to opt for this once again.
Needless to say, the directive also needs to be binding.
Countries downstream must be able to count on the fact that countries upstream meet the quality objectives.
Quality has a price, but pollution could well have a much higher price tag in future.
Mr President, Commissioner, my compliments to Mrs Lienemann on her excellent work on the Water Directive.
I should like to remind you that the very serious environmental problems facing us today in the shape of climate change, the depletion of primeval forests and overfishing, constantly affect our common and vital but, in some ways, unowned resources.
We should also recognise that, in Europe, our fresh water sources may be said to be on the borderline between being owned by everyone and by no-one.
It is therefore strategically important that responsibility for water is established.
It is also important for the different watercourses to be kept together and managed as the totality they in fact are, irrespective of who owns one section or another of a common watercourse.
Ladies and gentlemen, the proposal for a directive does indeed, as many speakers have already said, represent an historic chance to simplify and improve the jumble of piecemeal EU regulations and directives and achieve a high level of environmental protection in Europe.
However, I have the impression that the policy in the water framework directive is geared towards deregulation and renationalisation.
I also hope that the vote will not be a washout and that will depend on what I see as two quite fundamental points.
First OSPAR.
We know that the Commission proposal does not go far enough; unfortunately this also applies to the proposal by the Committee on the Environment.
Merely pulling proposals out of the air is not enough.
What we need is a completely legally binding objective for OSPAR.
Only then will we manage to achieve legal clarity and, more importantly, objectives which are enforceable under the law.
Anything else will fall short of the mark and will not help to prevent ecological disasters, such as those which have just come to light in Romania and Hungary, from happening to us.
I find it unfortunate that national governments are not prepared to stand up for legally binding protection, despite having agreed internationally on OSPAR.
But I think that this is exactly what we have to make up for here in Parliament, in order to demonstrate that we will not allow the credibility of our policy to be lost or compromised.
It is also important to reinforce the polluter pays principle because prices must speak the ecological truth.
We must not bow down before the agricultural or chemical industry lobbyists; on the contrary, we must use our vote to promote and express that fact that we want the polluter pays principle and, hence, cost-covering prices.
Water is our most important resource and we must use our vote to ensure that the incentives and pressure are there to really comply with the OSPAR convention.
With closed production circuits this is possible; anything else would water down the directive.
Let us grab our chance.
Mr President, in the small amount of time allotted to me, I would like to welcome the Mrs Lienemann' s report and remind the House of three principles, to which all other principles must be subordinate, which are clearly expressed in the rapporteur' s amendments: water is not a commercial product, but the property of all the peoples of the Union; the ultimate objective is to eliminate all pollutants in surface water and groundwater, and to inform the public so that it can participate in the recuperation of water and not use water excessively given that it is such a precious commodity.
I know that this directive may have problems, given the differing situations of the various countries of the Union, as has already been mentioned.
The situation in the north is different from that in the south, and different from the situation in those countries which have the problem of desert areas.
I understand this.
However, there are some amendments which attempt to help the countries of the south, specifically Amendment No 43 which, with regard to the recuperation of costs, also indicates that Member States must take into account the social and environmental conditions of the countries when it comes to decision making.
There are also difficulties with the issue of transfers.
In my country - I live in the north of Spain -, there is a considerable difference between the north and the south, and difficulties arise when we have to transfer water from one place to another.
However, Mrs Lienemann' s report also says that the river basins receiving the transferred water must save and protect their water.
I know that this is a difficult report and that the differing situations of countries cause difficulties, but we must move forward with a framework directive which will prevent a repetition of what is happening on the Danube and what happened in Doñana.
We cannot allow our European water to be polluted, Mr President, and we must produce a directive which will strengthen the political will of governments to preserve the resource of water, which is so precious to all of us.
Mr President, my compliments to the rapporteur on a splendid report.
As an Irish Member of the European Parliament, coming from a country which has large reserves of rich water, I support the vast majority of the proposals included in this directive.
However, I would now like to look at the areas of difference between Parliament's Committee on the Environment and the Council.
The latter has already brought forward its common position on this matter.
According to the Council the objective of achieving good surface water status should be secured no later than 16 years after the directive enters into force, whereas Parliament's Committee on the Environment would like to see this deadline shortened to ten years.
I see no reason why European Union Member States cannot work to implement the key provisions of this directive in as short a time as possible.
I now turn to the amendments to be tabled before Parliament tomorrow concerning the principle of the recovery of cost of water usage.
The Council in its common position states that the European Union governments must take account of the principle of recovery of the cost of water usage.
No specific target date for the implementation of this principle was included in the common position.
Amendment No 43 seeks to ensure that by the year 2010 water pricing policies in Europe must provide adequate incentives to use water efficiently.
Moreover, an adequate contribution from different economic sectors, broken down into industrial, household and agricultural sectors, must ensure that this policy is implemented.
Unless these amendments are supported tomorrow a strong message will be sent out that metering and water rates should be implemented for households right across the European Union states.
This is politically impractical from an Irish perspective, as indeed it would be from the perspective of other EU Member States such as Portugal, Greece and Spain.
Mr President, I want first of all to say thank you to Mrs Lienemann for her report.
It is here and now that we decide to what extent the EU countries are to work effectively for a cleaner aquatic environment in the years to come.
We can do this by, as a Parliament, amending the Council' s common position and showing the way forward in working for a cleaner environment.
In its unaltered form, the present directive could, in fact, have very unfortunate and long-term consequences for the environment and for our drinking water.
It would be to send out the wrong signals both to European industry and to the European people.
It is crucial to adhere to a limit upon total discharges of chemicals into our waters.
The directive quite obviously provides too extended a time frame within which time is to be spent measuring every single one of the approximately 100,000 chemicals in circulation.
We cannot afford to wait.
In this connection, I would ask Parliament to support Amendment No 108, in which the words "water pollution caused by individual pollutants" are replaced by "prevention of water pollution through the continuous reduction in discharges" .
We cannot delay environmental work by going into inordinate detail rather than working on reducing total discharges of hazardous substances into the environment.
The EU' s Ministers for the Environment must therefore stand by their affiliation to the OSPAR Convention, which now already defines what is hazardous to the environment.
This Convention should be our guide in working for the clean environment which we owe to ourselves and, not least, to our descendants.
Mr President, it is difficult to summarise the areas covered by such a large and complex directive.
The Treaty of Amsterdam reiterates the priority criteria for prevention, for the implementation of the 'polluter pays' principle and for sustainable development through an environmental impact assessment.
Clearly, the importance of recognising the economic value of ecological factors in setting prices and making operators accountable through the adoption of incentives for non-polluting systems, seems unquestionable in the light of events that characterise the relationship between economic development and the protection of our environmental heritage, particularly our water resources.
This situation is loudly echoed in many sectors of the economy, and especially in the agricultural sector.
The concept of good agricultural practice has been introduced in amongst the complexity of the current relationships between agriculture, environment and water resources, and between positive and negative effects, and amongst the wide range of local realities and production systems and so on. This concept indicates which agricultural production method to use in order to satisfy the Community expectation of an environmental protection of water resources that surpasses basic standards, along with the subsequent costs and reductions in income.
The obligation to develop and consolidate a strategy for integration derives from this notion, with the aim of keeping the management of water resources at the heart of the sustainable economic production model in the light of current conditions.
We must not, with this in mind, pursue a strategy of separating the objective of preventing a deterioration in the state of surface water and groundwater from the objectives of protecting, improving and restoring their quality, as this would create a superfluous hierarchy of priorities detrimental to the overall functioning of interventions and specific measures that target a combined approach and the use of the best available techniques.
As regards eliminating the pollution generated by dangerous substances in the aquatic environment, an optimum approach should provide a regulation at both national and Community levels, which enables clearer identification of the various classes of bodies of water polluted as a result of human production activities.
Finally, we need to set up a system which prepares an objective list of potentially dangerous substances, using the increased information available on their chemical, physical and biological properties, in such a way as to create an integrated model for intervention at a range of strategic levels in order to protect our water heritage, which is fundamental to us all.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, if we are to take the principle of sustainability enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam seriously, then our long-term objective must be to achieve zero inputs in our water because we need to safeguard water so that future generations do not pay the price for our water consumption.
We can achieve this long-term objective by developing measures with demanding standards.
In this respect, I fully support the amendments proposed by Mrs Lienemann to develop a reasonable approach using quality standards so that we can eventually say that, when people use water, they are not consuming it but maintaining present stocks.
This directive contains a number of very positive elements which are worth highlighting.
First there is wide information for and involvement by the public, a rarity in a European directive.
Secondly, there is compulsory cooperation.
I am glad a holistic approach to water is being taken here and that authorities in the individual national states and beyond the borders of the national states are at last obliged to work together and ensure that water is of a high quality.
Thirdly, I should like to address the question of the timetable.
I am firmly convinced that we need a strict, tight timetable in order to work towards our long-term objective.
Compare it with what happens in December.
We all know in December that Christmas Eve falls on 24th December and we start buying presents.
But what would we do if we knew in December that Christmas was in thirty years' time.
We all know what we would do, which is why we need a tight timetable for our water policy.
I emphatically support the rapporteur' s proposals and think that we need a tight timetable for all areas of the directive, from the list of measures to the question of employment measures.
Mr President, the purpose of the present objective ought to be to ensure that the Member States work together to protect groundwater, drinking water and surface water and that the level of protection corresponds to existing EU environmental legislation.
May I take this opportunity to remind you that previous resolutions concerning the Nitrates Directive have still not been implemented in all Member States, in spite of the fact that there is a common EU resolution.
The present proposal tightens up the protection of the aquatic environment in a number of ways which exceed our current environmental objectives.
It is proposed that a target should be achieved for concentrations in the aquatic environment which is close to the background values for naturally occurring substances and close to zero for humanly produced synthetic substances.
This cannot be done, and it also, in any case, goes against nature.
Adopting this report would have serious consequences for agriculture in the EU if concentrations of, for example, phosphorus and nitrogen could not exceed the background values for these substances in the aquatic environment and if a limit of zero were to be established for pesticides in the aquatic environment.
European agriculture would not, for example, be able to grow bread grain with a high enough protein content for it to be used for making bread.
As a result, agricultural production would move to other countries outside the EU, with consequent high socio-economic and employment costs.
I cannot vote in favour of the sections in the Water Framework Directive which deal with these states of affairs.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, water is a precious raw material.
Millions of people do not even have clean water - a absolute necessity for survival - at their disposal.
It should, therefore, not surprise us that water is the cause of wars.
The capitalist world too sends out its pawns in order to gain maximum control over water reservoirs.
General interest or solidarity often do not come into the equation.
Europe is therefore facing an arduous task; that of combining a Community water policy which is fragmented in terms of objectives and means into more coherent framework legislation.
I have to admit that in Flanders, where I come from, we still have a long way to go too.
We were recently rapped on the knuckles by the Commission regarding this matter.
Anyone with any sense would like to see this framework directive used as a big stick for those pursuing policies who are now failing in some way.
The common position is in this respect a farce, a document with no strings attached and a true affront in the light of the OSPAR agreements.
The period of implementation can even be extended up to 34 years.
