In other words, will each proposal contain an additional sheet stating that checks have been made as to the application of the precautionary principle and the following conclusion has been reached?
. Thank you very much, Dagmar Roth-Behrendt, for these questions.
Of course, this is shared by the whole Commission.
This is a common communication which was written by the three of us, David Byrne, Erkki Liikanen and myself, but it has been passed unanimously in the Commission today.
It received strong support from the rest of the Commissioners and it has been through an interservice consultation in the whole of the Commission.
So we have really worked through this document and I am sure that they are all able to describe the guidelines and the principles as laid down in this document.
Yes, I would say we already use this way of working with different, difficult issues like a new chemical strategy for example.
And, I am sure that we will also mention it explicitly when we work with this principle.
We have just recently had a case of using the precautionary principle when it came to ban phthalates in soft PVC toys; and of course, we apply it in several different environmental areas.
It has been mainly used in the environmental field, but, of course also when it comes to human health.
So, we will try to be very clear about how and when to use it.
Mr President, Commissioner, regarding the relationship between science, on the one hand, and applying the precautionary principle on the other, the communication states that invoking that precautionary principle always requires a political decision if there is a lack of scientific evidence.
Needless to say, this accords science a great deal of power.
We might ask ourselves, what kind of scientists will supply this documentation and what do they stand for?
The communication also states that the precautionary principle can be applied, provided there is a sufficient recognised minority of scientists.
I would like to ask, what is, then, the definition of a recognised minority?
How would you describe this?
What establishes a recognised minority?
If a political decision is involved, I would also like to ask: who takes this political decision?
The Commission?
The Council?
And to what extent will the European Parliament be able to play a role in this?
What is the role of the scientific committees?
What, also, will be the role of the food authorities which you are about to set up?
Finally, will this whole decision-making process be carried out in a transparent, public way?
These are my three questions.
. Yes, Mr President, that is true.
There were many and difficult issues and not always crystal clear, but I will try to answer some questions.
Who will take the decision, who are the decision-makers?
Well, that depends on who the legislators are.
This is part of risk management.
They have to look at, for example, the concerns of people in relation to a special issue, and they have to judge from what is known about the scientific evidence in a certain case.
However, it is true that it does not need a big majority of the scientific community to be able to use the precautionary principle.
It can be used on evidence from a minority or where science is incomplete.
That is, of course, where you strike a balance between this principle as a political tool and science.
It is not always easy to describe exactly how this process is done, but there is no question of changing the scientific base.
We use the experts to get as much scientific information and facts as possible before we take a decision; and that should also be done in the future.
You have to see this as a tool for risk management.
You have to decide whether you want to put people in danger, for example, or if you want to protect the environment; and you have to look at the science that is available.
You have to assess all that and evaluate the science.
Then you decide to take a measure or not, to take action or not.
So, there is no answer to all your questions but this does not change the system of the scientists that we use today or the system of experts that we use today.
Mr President, I have a question concerning an actual, concrete case in which it should be possible to apply the precautionary principle.
It is about brominated flame retardants.
It is a fact that these substances are now being discovered. There are increased concentrations of them in both people and the environment.
There are many people who maintain that they entail major risks, while others question how large the risks involved in these substances really are.
Recently, both Sweden and Denmark urged the Commission in the Council of Ministers to take the initiative and ban brominated flame retardants.
I am wondering, therefore, if you are preparing such a ban and if it would not fit in very well with your approach to the precautionary principle itself to come up with such an initiative.
. (SV) Mr President, thank you very much, Mr Sjöstedt, for this question.
The issue of brominated flame retardants is an important one.
It was raised quite recently in the Environment Council by a number of ministers who want the Commission to look at what basis there might be for a ban and at what might need to be done.
We are in the process of looking into this question and assessing what knowledge we have today and what it is possible to do.
Allow me to remind you, however, that use of the precautionary principle does not need to be synonymous with there being a total ban.
There may be a series of different measures which can be taken.
It ought not, therefore, to be immediately interpreted as a ban.
Where brominated flame retardants are concerned, there may eventually be a ban, but it is important to say that the precautionary principle permits the whole spectrum of political measures and initiatives to be taken.
This issue is extremely topical.
The Commission is to do its job and give proper attention to the issue before we come back with an assessment of what needs to be done.
You said that the precautionary principle should not be used as a disguised trade barrier.
Is the understanding of this point the same on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean?
I think we are going to have problems particularly with hormone-treated beef and genetically modified crops.
Will the Americans take the same view of this point as we do?
. (SV) Mr President, I am pleased to be able to tell you that, in Montreal, we have just signed a protocol concerning bio-safety.
We succeeded there in agreeing, at an international forum, as to the definition of the precautionary principle.
I consider it to be a breakthrough that we succeeded in concluding this protocol.
I believe it will set the trend for future discussions concerning the precautionary principle.
We are going to be able to use this as an example of how the precautionary principle is to be interpreted.
It is, moreover, also accepted as an important and effective tool.
Mr President, I have two questions. I shall try to be very brief indeed.
The first question concerns the implementation of the precautionary principle.
As I have understood it, there has been a certain lack of clarity in some respects as to how this is to be understood.
Is it the case that a risk assessment is firstly to be carried out, including a cost-benefit analysis?
In that case, I am rather concerned, because the idea was really that a cost-benefit analysis should not be used as a tool for deciding whether the precautionary principle should be introduced. Instead, the precautionary principle should come first.
My second question concerns the burden of proof.
I remember Margot Wallström being introduced as Commissioner in the Committee.
At that time, she was talking about the desire for a reversed burden of proof.
In other words, a product' s manufacturer is to demonstrate whether or not the product is hazardous.
I want to know whether this also applies in the document which the Commission has presented now.
. (SV) Thank you, Mrs Schörling.
These are two important questions, and it is good that I should be given the opportunity to clarify them.
No, one must not begin by carrying out a cost-benefit analysis. Instead, the latter should be based upon an assessment of what it is we know, of what science has to tell us and of how we should view the product concerned in the light of the risks we judge there to exist for the environment or for the health of human beings or animals.
When, on the other hand, the decision has been made to take a certain measure, the one chosen ought to be cost-effective so that there is in fact no resort to measures which are wholly unreasonable given their degree of effectiveness.
It is not, therefore, the case that one must begin with a cost-benefit analysis.
The second question concerns the reversed burden of proof.
It is perfectly correct that we need to apply this in certain cases.
I have used chemical strategy as a good example of an area in which we need to do this.
There, however, we are concerned with that particular area, whereas it may be said that the present communication concerning the precautionary principle is horizontal in the sense that it concerns the full range of specific technical areas that are of political concern.
Therefore, the issues of the reversed burden of proof and of what the burden of proof is to look like are not especially discussed in this context. Instead, it is a question of political decision-making and of the bases for this.
It is, however, perfectly correct that, when it comes, for example, to chemicals, we must ensure that we obtain a reversed burden of proof.
Mr President, I believe that the precautionary principle needs to be quite radical in order to work, otherwise we shall always be confused by all the different interpretations possible.
I will give an example: a fungicide has been proven to cause babies to be born blind. It is therefore a teratogenic substance.
Very well, it is a fungicide, it kills off mould.
This teratogenicity has been demonstrated by just one English laboratory, perhaps because it is the only one that has carried out tests.
Now, in my opinion, given that this is such a serious risk to health, the precautionary principle lays down that this product should immediately be taken off the market, which New Zealand has done, for example.
So I want to put this question to you. When human health is at stake, or there is the possibility that human health will be seriously affected, should we not perhaps carry out a cost-benefit analysis?
The cost of a baby being born blind is too high; there are no benefits that can compensate for this.
In short, Commissioner, I would therefore like to know whether in this case, the precautionary principle as you understand it, would in any case, require the product to be taken off the market, until such time as another laboratory provides evidence to the contrary.
. (SV) Mr President, no one wants more than I do to see a situation in which we are able to apply the precautionary principle in such a way that it is seen as radically protecting people' s health and the environment.
Obviously, I cannot adopt a stance on this special case and on the particular product which has been mentioned here, but I shall go directly back and see what I can obtain in the way of information about this particular case.
The truth, of course, is that a great many Member States, and no doubt other nations too, have taken measures to protect their populations' health which amount to using the precautionary principle, even if it has not always been called that.
Naturally, it is not in the first place a question of cost; there can in fact be an enormous cost to society if the decision to take a particular measure is avoided.
Nor must it be a case of sitting and calculating the value of a human life over and against the cost of taking a particular measure.
I think, however, it is quite obvious that when it is eventually time to decide upon a particular step to be taken, it is often the case that there are many different courses of action to choose between.
In those circumstances, consideration should be given to what is likely to produce the best result.
I cannot forbear telling you about an occasion when the expression cost-effective was used by people whom one cannot perhaps imagine using it, namely when I was on a visit to Africa.
At a hospice for AIDS patients, I met two Irish Catholic nuns who were caring for dying AIDS patients.
They were the first to say that, each day, they must think about doing what is most cost-effective because resources had to suffice for their poor patients there. We must be very careful about how we use resources.
I believe we can learn something from this.
We must, of course, always ensure that we use our resources in the most effective manner and in such a way that they provide the broadest possible help.
As is also explained in the present communication, it is not therefore correct that one must first begin with some sort of cost-benefit analysis.
Consideration should be given to what science is offering in the way of knowledge, and this should be used as an important political tool for protecting the environment and people' s health.
Mr President, it is a rare honour to be given a second opportunity to ask questions!
Commissioner, I would like to come back again to my first question, when I asked about the other Commissioners, for it may have sounded as though I was in jest.
Indeed you responded in kind, as I knew you would do.
I would like to draw your attention to something Mr Goodwill asked, that is to the connections we make between the precautionary principle and the world beyond the European Union.
I have good reason for asking this.
As you rightly said, the precautionary principle is needed in precisely those areas where, as yet, there is no scientific evidence.
How can we ensure that we will not be laying ourselves open to attack at any time, for example by our partners in the USA, on account of the bio safety protocol not being adequate to their purposes?
How can we be sure that those of your colleagues responsible for industrial policy and foreign trade policy, will not, as they did on the last few occasions with your predecessors, keep pulling the carpet from underneath you?
That is exactly what it is all about, otherwise we might as well not bother talking about the precautionary principle here, Commissioner!
Mr President, I think it is extremely important to point to the present communication' s guidelines for using the precautionary principle as a way of repudiating assertions to the effect that we always want to use the principle for protectionist reasons.
I am certain that we are going to have more conflicts, for example with the United States.
We should not be so naïve as to think otherwise.
Ever since we signed this protocol in Montreal, we nonetheless have international recognition and a common definition written into a protocol dealing with the environment, health and trade.
This constitutes a good example, therefore.
We should be in no doubt that conflicts may arise in the future too, but we can now show that we do not use the precautionary principle arbitrarily.
We now have a number of guidelines for using the precautionary principle, and we have increased support among our respective peoples for using it, something which is clearly established in the present communication.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The focus on the political precautionary principle means that we have being discussing it for almost two hours and this topic is now being viewed, so to speak, as more than an ordinary aspect of administration, even though, as we have been able to establish from the interventions, questions and replies, it is a topic which we believe to be of considerable importance.
The debate is closed.
Intergovernmental Conference
The next item is the report (A5-0018/2000) by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen, on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, on the convening of the Intergovernmental Conference [14094/1999 - C5-0341/1999 - 1999/0825(CNS)].
Mr President, I will begin by thanking the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission for all our recent very useful contacts.
Let me also once more thank my co-rapporteur Mr Leinen for our excellent collaboration.
The Intergovernmental Conference that is about to begin is important, both in a general sense and more particularly in view of the imminent enlargement.
The work of the Conference will determine the structure and method based on which Europe will be functioning in the twentieth century.
For the European Union of the future to be able to function more effectively, more democratically and with complete transparency, clearly what we need is an extensive and in-depth reform of the institutions and the way they work.
The first and substantive prerequisite for achieving that reform is the agenda based on which the Intergovernmental Conference is to begin its work.
From the decisions made at the Helsinki Summit, it emerges that the agenda agreed there is unsatisfactory and does not guarantee the essential and substantive changes required for creating a more functional Europe, one that is more effective, more democratic and more transparent.
This is because the Helsinki agenda is limited to consideration only of the three issues that relate in a fragmentary way to the structure and operation of just two of the European Union' s institutional bodies.
I will not repeat which ones, because everyone knows.
My conclusion is justified on the one hand by the constant and sometimes very insistent demands of the peoples of Europe and on the other hand by the huge scale of the great enterprise in which the European Union is already involved, namely enlargement.
Granted this, the new Intergovernmental Conference must not fail to include in its agenda issues which, properly addressed, would ensure the correct operation of all and not just some of the European Union' s institutions.
Just as it also must not fail to include everyday issues which, for that very reason, are highly visible to the European public.
In its numerous debates and its reports so far the European Parliament has openly supported the convening of the Intergovernmental Conference.
At the same time, however, I am asking for it to include issues that improve and complement the reform, I repeat, of all the institutional bodies as well as issues that are of direct concern and interest to the European public such as health, energy, culture, transport and even tourism.
Whether or not the agenda will ultimately be widened is still the subject of debate and on this point I would like to extol the political conduct of the Portuguese Presidency, which has repeatedly made a commitment to the European Parliament to make the necessary efforts towards that end.
All the same, whether or not more issues will be considered must in no way diminish the importance attributed by every Member State to the Intergovernmental Conference.
This is because the institutional framework within which Europe will operate in the future is a foundation of European integration and is therefore a matter of the greatest national importance for every one of the Union' s Member States.
In light of what I have said, I ask Parliament to approve the opinion which Mr Leinen and I have put before you, so that on 14 February, the work of the Intergovernmental Conference can begin and our two representatives, Mr Brok and Mr Tsatsos, can proceed with the difficult task that awaits them with the European Parliament' s backing.
