- (DE) The Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance abstained from the vote on this matter because, in the plenary debate of the previous day, Commissioner Bolkestein did not respond to any of my questions regarding EU accession to the WIPO Treaties.
In institutional terms, there has been no clarification of what role the EP is to play in the further development of the WIPO Treaties.
In addition, there is a clear tendency, in matters of international jurisdiction, more and more often to obtain a pure EU jurisdiction.
When it is, then, still not clear to what extent the EP can participate in the decision-making processes, the question of legitimacy arises.
Moreover, the concept of 'author' is not defined in the Treaties.
In this regard, too, the Commission has not answered the question as to what definition it wishes to base its discussions on, and whether it wishes to settle foreseeable conflicts by imposing its own definition of the law on others.
One of the trickiest aspects is the public interest: will ratifying and applying WIPO lead to the privatisation of culture?
And, finally, the matter of the relationship between TRIPs and WIPO must be clarified. Regarding this, too, there has been only silence by way of a response from the Commission.
If nothing helpful is forthcoming in the course of a parliamentary debate planned for clarification and orientation, then we must at least abstain from voting.
Graefe zu Baringdorf (A5-0015/2000)
. (PT) Food safety issues are in the spotlight following the BSE and dioxin scandals.
GMOs are still the subject of great uncertainty, both in terms of their environmental impact and of their effects on human and animal health.
The precautionary principle must therefore apply in the absence of scientific certainty.
The use of biotechnology needs to be studied in greater depth and not just "packaged" for immediate sale to boost the profits of a few multinationals in this sector.
The profit motive is very much behind the present food safety crises.
This is the context that the rapporteur finds himself working in, making a legal link between the issue of GMOs and feedingstuffs, and noting that the latter "shall be authorised only if ... safe for human health and the environment" .
Furthermore, he considers that "genetically modified additives shall be clearly identified as such on any label or any document, official or otherwise, which is affixed to or accompanies the additive" .
This will facilitate greater control and traceability of such additives and guarantee the consumer' s freedom of choice.
In view of the Montreal Protocol on Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs), I welcome the fact that the rapporteur has included these issues in his report, and I have therefore voted in favour of it.
Stenzel report (A5-0034/2000)
Mr President, I would very briefly like to give an explanation of vote, on behalf of the PPE Group on the EQUAL report.
We have followed a nominal list which was identical to that which we had agreed upon beforehand with the Socialist Group.
The Socialist Group has now changed its mind and this is why the report is not as clear as it would have been.
This is why we are abstaining.
We want to ensure that the EQUAL report, which is very important for refugees, the elderly, the handicapped and women, simply goes ahead.
It is regrettable that, due to the procedure, the report has received such unfavourable attention in this plenary session.
I am convinced that the rapporteur' s nationality has played a certain role, which should not be of relevance in this Parliament.
This is actually in conflict with European values and certainly with the parliamentary values which are referred to so often in this Parliament.
These were our reasons for abstaining from the vote on this report.
We want EQUAL to go ahead.
We assent to the main thrust of it, but we deplore the procedure and especially the fact that some groups have exploited this procedure to their advantage.
Mr President, as the representative of the Pensioners' Party in the European Parliament, I abstained in the vote on the EQUAL initiative because, although it provides more support than in the past for projects aimed at combating age discrimination, its proposals are not sufficiently trenchant or specific.
I also abstained for another reason. I think the time has come for the European institutions to stop experimenting and trying to establish best practices for doing what we should do and begin to give European citizens some firm indication regarding what Europe wants Europe to be.
The time has come for concrete measures and for putting theory into practice.
. (DA) We have voted in favour of the report on the communication from the Commission concerning the guidelines for EU initiative programmes (CIP).
Basically, we are opposed to programmes and structural funds of this type but, since the vote is only concerned with how - and not to what extent - these resources are to be used, we have simply adopted a position on the issue.
We think it is important to guarantee equal opportunities for the groups discussed in the report.
. (FR) We did not vote against this report insofar as it contains a number of correct general principles such as the need to combat racism in the workplace and reduce inequalities between the sexes on the job market.
Nor did we vote for it because it is all too vague, all too pie in the sky.
And yet, in the chapter on aid and training for refugees, the report marks a step backwards from the initial text by stipulating that they no longer apply to refugees as such but to "refugees within the meaning of the Geneva Convention" .
This restriction is inadmissible at a time when countless refugees throughout Europe are in a drastic situation, with no protection, forced to work on the black market, and to hide, while so-called democratic governments and state police forces hunt them down.
The first thing we need to do in this area is to give these stateless people the legal means to live a decent life and be able to work without being relegated to the status of pariahs, the victims of unscrupulous employers and multiple forms of administrative and police harassment, the main form of which is having to live in permanent fear of expulsion.
.
I voted in favour of Mrs Stenzel' s report on the EQUAL initiative as I believe that it is essential to continue the work begun under the previous NOW, HORIZON, YOUTHSTART and INTEGRA strands of the ADAPT and EMPLOYMENT initiatives.
The lessons we have learned under these actions must be built on.
EQUAL stands for "equality" .
It must be seen to deliver.
I welcome the proposed concentration on promoting new ways of combating discrimination and any form of inequality in the labour market.
I also favour the desire to move away from an out-dated format and to bring partners together in search of innovative ways to tackle unemployment.
There must be flexibility.
I deeply regret that only limited funds are available for this initiative.
In the last programming period 9% of Structural Funds were available for Community initiatives.
The figure is now 5.35%.
This means that funds must be used to achieve maximum effect and information on successful partnerships must be widely and rapidly disseminated.
The Employment and Social Affairs Committee adopted several of the amendments I put forward, concerning for example, the emphasis on access to start-up capital, how to exploit new business opportunities in cities, towns and rural areas and the criticism that under the previous initiatives there was inadequate participation by business.
This often meant that good projects did not lead to real job opportunities.
The positive experience of innovative actions of small promoters was jeopardised by their distance from the policy process.
I also stressed the need for prevention.
The involvement of the social partners also needs to be highlighted.
There must be flexibility and the administrative burden must be reduced as a priority.
There must be flexibility also for countries with small budgets.
While there are some aspects of the report which I believe would be better dealt with in a different way, overall I believe the report offers a flexible and sensible approach and should be supported.
.
(PT) The Commission intends to use the Community initiative EQUAL to replace the Community EMPLOYMENT and ADAPT initiatives and various subprogrammes in these areas, such as NOW, on new opportunities for women, HORIZON, for disabled persons, YOUTHSTART, for promoting the labour market integration of young people, and INTEGRA, for groups threatened with exclusion. Unfortunately, this involves a significant reduction in appropriations.
Accordingly, the Commission will use this initiative to develop what it considers to be new ways of fighting discrimination and inequality of all kinds in the labour market, based on the four pillars of the employment policy guidelines.
This is a great deal to build on such fragile foundations.
However, in order to give this new approach some chance of success, the Commission should have opted for a less complicated proposal, a more simple and direct one, involving the NGOs from the outset, so that partnerships could develop in a balanced way.
The Commission did not do that.
We hope that it will at least revisit the aspects that we have mentioned.
Mr President, some of us in Parliament will remember the successful film, "Cocoon", in which some elderly people drank a special kind of water that made them young again.
In my view, it is, therefore, immensely important to exercise extreme vigilance over the water we all drink and, consequently, to study and approve the provisions referred to here.
For that reason, I approved these measures, but I should also like to express the hope that there will be particularly rigorous monitoring of water purity at the point where it enters our houses, to ensure that it is of the highest level.
In the measures that have been adopted, I note that support for people who purify their water in their own homes has been omitted. I trust that this will be remedied in the future.
Apart from Amendment No 76, which was an error, since I intended to vote in favour, the rest of my votes can be explained by means of the following fictional situation:
Supposed draft environmental directive: "European Parliament and Council Directive establishing the obligation to maintain, during winter, a temperature of no less than eighteen degrees centigrade in the streets, squares and parks of the cities of Europe ".
Guidelines of the Directive: a) each city shall provide the means, in terms of energy and technology, sufficient for this objective to be achieved by 2012; b) the full costs shall be passed on to the inhabitants of each city by means of electricity prices.
Opinion of an MEP from the north of Europe: "This Directive would be unfair since, for example, the cost for an inhabitant of Stockholm would be two hundred times greater than the cost for an inhabitant of Naples ".
Opinion of an MEP from the south of Europe: "Nevertheless, this is a question of competitivity and equality of conditions".
(End of fiction).
In explaining my vote, I must say that it is positive that there is a Community directive on water, but I believe that environmental dogma will not lead to the construction of Europe, but will lead to legislative caricature.
We cannot give equal treatment to countries which suffer from floods and droughts, such as the Mediterranean countries, and countries with northern levels of rainfall.
Furthermore, it would show a lack of solidarity to make transfers of water, between different river basins, practically impossible in the future.
Once more we must remember that we are undergoing a continental project for political union.
.
(FR) Drinking, eating, washing, farming - water irrigates each act of our daily life and we treat it, wrongly, as an unfailing and inexhaustible resource.
A simple gesture such as turning on a tap seems to bring water straight from the source.
But the source is threatening to run dry.
Scientific studies are now no more than a formality: water will be the main resource at stake in years to come, starting tomorrow.
But tomorrow will be too late.
We have to lay down the rules of play today, before we all lose.
In adopting the water directive on Wednesday 15 February, the European Parliament confirmed its wish to protect surface water, coastal wasters, inland waters and groundwater.
Europe now has a framework which will allow it to prevent any deterioration in the quality of water, promote its sustainable use, protect eco-systems, help fight floods and droughts and eliminate the disposal of dangerous substances.
We have thrown water a life-belt.
. (FR) It is with the greatest satisfaction that I welcome this ambitious proposal for a framework directive on water policy.
The ecological disaster on the banks of the Danube is a reminder, as if we needed one, that all too often human negligence jeopardises natural resources such as water.
The objective of this proposal for a directive, which dates back to 1997, is to put an end to the fragmentation of previous water legislation and protect surface water, coastal waters, inland waters and groundwater.
It provides a framework within which we can prevent any further deterioration, protect ecosystems, promote sustainable water use, help to fight floods and drought and gradually eliminate the disposal of dangerous substances.
Specific directives will then be adopted within this framework.
The procedure involved in drafting this text was lengthy.
The proposal for a directive was amended twice, first in 1997 and then in 1998.
A technical working party made up of Council and Parliament representatives met in January 1999 to try and reconcile the positions of the two institutions.
However, the Committee on the Environment has tabled numerous amendments, most of which I support.
As far as the timetable and objectives are concerned, the Council' s objective is to achieve good quality surface water within 16 years of the entry into force of the directive, while the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy wants this reduced to 10 years.
The committee is also calling for an end to discharges or leaks of dangerous substances by 2020, the final objective being to achieve zero input by 2020.
The Council hopes to achieve good quality groundwater within 16 years, but the Commission wants no further deterioration in the chemical status of groundwater so that good quality groundwater can be achieved in 10 years.
All the standards and all the objectives relating to protected zones should be achieved within 10 years, not 16.
I must say that I support these reduced deadlines, especially as provision is made for derogations.
As far as costs are concerned, I approve the proposal whereby Member States will have to ensure by 2010 that water pricing policies provide incentives for more sensible use of water resources.
I likewise expect the European Commission to make a clear declaration undertaking to submit a proposal to ensure that water pricing policies reflect the environmental costs and the costs in terms of resources by 2012.
I will close by quoting one of the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment, which needs no further comment: "Water is not a commercial product like any other but, rather, a heritage which belongs to the peoples of the European Union and which must be protected, defended and treated as such" .
. I wish to put on the official record my concerns with the Lienemann report and also the reasons for my vote.
We have all agreed on the need to put in place proper controls for the protection of our water supplies and also for the users of water.
There is much to be praised in the approach to the problem suggested by the rapporteur.
However, the question of taxation or charges for the use of water is a matter which, under the rules of subsidiarity, should be left to the Member States for decision.
In my belief it is incorrect to use such a crude tool as a common European charge for this issue.
In Ireland all the major users of water, commercial, industrial and agricultural, already pay for their use of water.
This is a decision of national and local government, and this is where all future decisions should be retained.
These are the main reasons for my vote.
. The European Union is currently in the process of adopting new EU water legislation to update and to establish a long-term strategy to ensure the supply of clean drinking water and the protection of existing water resources including rivers and coastal waters.
I support the objectives of this community action in the field of water policy.
However, I do not support the proposal that domestic water users be charged for water used.
Water, in this context, is a commercial commodity.
It is an essential to life itself and people must have free access to sufficient supplies for normal daily life.
We see it as positive that an attempt is being made to reverse the trend towards water degradation, which is most alarming and which governments all too often tend to sweep under the carpet.
We all know that water is a commodity without which mankind cannot live and that it is imperative that its quality should be preserved.
But it is also essential to bear in mind that the various elements of water policy cannot be separated, and that action on this aspect will affect all the others.
The "physico-chemical and ecological quality of water" was highlighted during the debate and in the proposals, and the adverse effects of other aspects was, at best, touched upon marginally.
It is essential to be aware of the widely varying situations in different Member States, such as specific climatic conditions, water regimes and fluctuations in them over the year, the social, economic and ecological effects of applying standards, and also of the failure to do so.
It was because of our concern about these issues that we disagreed with some of the proposals put forward by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, and in particular those relating to an excessively restrictive timetable and to the scant attention paid to social and agricultural aspects, which are very important for a country like Portugal, which suffers from water shortage problems and also inadequate socio-economic development.
But we also believe that, in many cases, the proposals put forward by the Commission and the Council represent too much of a step backwards, which is why we would like to see a vote balanced between the various requirements in the proposals presented to us.
. (FR) We are disappointed by the Council' s common position on this proposal for a framework directive.
It is minimalist on a number of points, especially with regard to the dates of entry into force of far too many provisions and the number of, and conditions for, implementing the derogations.
However, the main problem is with the definition of the objective which the European Union wishes to pursue with this text.
The objective is of course to create, first and foremost, a clear general framework which will allow the law in this area to be simplified.
However the Union should be seeking, beyond that, to improve the quality of both surface and groundwater.
Public health and the supply of drinking water are at stake, as are biological quality and diversity and the conservation of rural areas and species.
From this point of view, the common position is weak.
I should like to see our Parliament defend a more ambitious position than the Council' s position, but I should also like that position to be equally credible.
The "zero input" and "zero pollution" requirement, including for substances naturally present in water, is not realistic.
I am not one of those MEPs who thinks that it is essential to adopt "extremist" amendments at second reading with the sole aim of gaining room for manoeuvre in preparation for negotiations with the Council of Ministers.
On the contrary, I object to this systematically applied strategy.
It damages Parliament.
Our messages to our citizens and to the Council are muddled and lack credibility.
Overly strict, unrealistic environmental objectives will not be applied because they are unattainable.
Is that the message we want to send out?
There is one other specific point which is dear to me: Member States should be able, if they so wish, to set up trans-national water transfers.
This type of project complies with the principle of regional cohesion and solidarity, which we have always defended, and, as such, should enjoy the widespread support of the European Union in the context of the promotion of trans-European networks and regional policy (through the Structural Funds).
I would like to remind the House that we adopted an own initiative report on the technical feasibility of trans-European water networks two years ago and I would be most obliged if the European Commission could shortly tell Parliament what action it has taken on that report.
.
(ES) We have seen a report concerned with water quality in Europe transformed into an instrument of commercial war.
