In particular, we should be updating the areas where human rights need to be safeguarded.
Globalisation could easily come to be regarded as a harmful process.
Many countries are currently questioning the principle of the universality of human rights. The belief is widespread that many human rights, including the right to life, contradicted as it is by the death penalty, depend on certain variables, while globalisation, which often has a negative connotation, is in danger of becoming the catch-all for rights, actions and policies everywhere in the world.
We should therefore do what is necessary to update the areas in which we can intervene, with renewed strength, to safeguard human rights.
In that context I would mention the following: social rights, workers' rights, quality of work, the need to ensure respect, where necessary, for all the criteria laid down by the International Labour Organisation, the right to tolerance and to respect - a right to which all minorities are entitled, particularly within the European Union.
I would also mention the right to develop. It is the right of all peoples who, in turn, are the sum of countless individuals each one of whom has the right to develop and to a future that, most importantly, is full of hope and personal growth, within each individual society.
All those aspects should be part of a rationale, a discourse and a contribution which the European Union should bring to human rights.
I hope that Parliament's participation in the Geneva session turns out to be more than just a token presence and that its representatives do more than just listen to and give evidence. First and foremost they should use the occasion to affirm that we regard the aspects I have just mentioned as central to the identity of the European Union and of the European nation, and that we also uphold the principle of the universality of human rights that transcends time and place.
That is what we hope for and is the cordial message that we are sending our governments, even if it goes against their interests.
Mr President, one of the saving features of this Parliament is that here we practise a consistent and active human rights policy: the flag flies high, as Mrs Malmström put it.
At the same time, however, we shut our eyes to the Union' s own problems: to the violence, inequality, and fourth world reality, which is part of everyday life in the EU.
It is absolutely right that we pay serious attention to the violations of human rights that are to be the subject of talks in Geneva.
The rhetoric that we use, however, often smacks of smugness, verging on the sort of narcissism we associate with human rights attitudes in North America.
It is nothing less than hypocritical to condemn the flagrant violation of human rights that occurs in non-EU countries if we are not prepared to extend a helping hand to those genuine refugees and asylum-seekers, whose position is now becoming more difficult in the EU.
Let us, in particular, focus attention on the re-admission clauses, which present a threat to the Geneva Convention and which should be blocked.
Unless we can maintain high standards of human rights with respect to refugees and asylum-seekers, we are not worthy of those European values which make up the European identity, as Vaclav Havel said here today, and among which he particularly mentioned respect for human rights and solidarity.
I worked for many years on the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission and it was really moving to see how a nation in such difficult circumstances was reaching out for a more open, European-style, pluralistic democratic society.
I fear that we are now moving in the opposite direction, towards European exclusiveness and apartheid.
Mr President, Commissioner, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, in my view, the question which needs to be raised in Geneva this year is certainly not the death penalty.
We have already had three resolutions on the death penalty approved in Geneva.
We failed at the General Assembly last year on a fallacious pretext, I refer to article 2.7, which we are otherwise happy to adopt for all other texts.
The question of the death penalty should therefore be raised at this year' s General Assembly, certainly not at the Geneva session.
As Mr Patten said, and I would like to thank him for the positions which he defended, the crucial point is China.
Unfortunately, the positions taken by the Commission and the Council, or at least the presidency, are more than just a hair' s breadth apart; this is serious, especially in the light of the Council' s macho position on Austria.
In my view, as far as China is concerned, and knowing that the European Union' s policy towards China has been a total failure, allegedly constructive dialogue has got us nowhere or, worse, it has given the Chinese new pretexts for increasing repression and for strengthening religious repression and the repression of freedoms (as Mrs Wallström has said with regard to the Internet) in all sectors, in Tibet, in inland Mongolia, in eastern Turkistan.
There is regression in every sector of Chinese civil society.
It is a fact: China is the major threat, the major threat to us, the threat which we must confront, the threat to peace.
It is the antithesis of democracy and you know as well as I that the Chinese, the Chinese leadership, is Communist first and Chinese second.
China likes doublespeak.
Until we have a firm position, we will achieve nothing with the Chinese authorities.
I think we need to seize the opportunity.
We need to associate ourselves with the American initiative.
We need to table a strong text and that text needs to be adopted.
We need to work.
The Fifteen need to start work right now, with all the members of the United Nations; we need, at long last, to issue a firm condemnation and then use that as a basis to gain a negotiating position.
Mr President, I would like to try to put a different perspective to this.
As you know, on Monday an unmanned spacecraft went into orbit around a peanut-shaped asteroid called Eros which is not very far from earth.
Photographs show us that there is no life on the asteroid, but much further out in our galaxy, the Milky Way, there are about 300 billion stars, many with planets.
Beyond the Milky Way there are 300 billion other galaxies with countless stars and planets.
It is probable, therefore, that there is a lot of life out there, and much of it much more advanced than we are.
Bearing in mind that the first television programmes from earth are now 50 light years out into space way beyond the nearest stars, I invite you to imagine with me what life out there in the stars thinks of us as they look at us.
What do they see?
They see a beautiful planet, teeming with life, but they see its atmosphere being polluted and warming up.
They see forests being cut down and deserts spreading.
Of the living creatures, they can see many animals that are treated cruelly, rare ones becoming extinct for ever.
How do they see the currently dominant species - that is us?
Well, they see the planet's resources being unevenly spread.
They see land being fought over, medicine for disease but not in the parts of the world where it is most wanted, books for schools - but not at all in the least-developed areas of our world, 50% of the world's population never making a telephone call in their whole life.
What do they see about the relationships between human beings?
They see us killing each other.
They see us restricting each other's liberties.
They see a never-ending series of local wars. They see some of our children drafted into the army as soldiers, or treated as prostitutes or slaves.
They see unequal treatment of men and women, of people of different ages, of minorities, of people of different coloured skins, of races, of beliefs, of immigrants, even neighbours.
We all know the picture.
The UN Convention on Human Rights 50 years ago was an attempt to correct this.
We should salute it - and I think we do.
Only in Europe are human rights enforceable in law.
Here in the European Parliament some of the Members do not want the Charter of Rights, which is being discussed at the moment, to become enforceable in law.
I say: shame on them!
Human rights should be enforceable in law in every country of the world.
That is the goal which we have to work towards.
Much, as Commissioner Patten said, remains to be done.
Finally, if you asked me: What if there is no life out there among the stars, what if we are alone? - which is an equally awe-inspiring thought - I would say: Do not you think we have a responsibility too to make our children behave properly, before letting them go out to populate other planets?
Mr President, human rights are universal, indivisible, interrelated and interwoven.
This well-known phrase, which is taken from the conclusions of the UN World Conference on human rights of 1993, is known off by heart by many.
That is positive.
But what about the human rights policy within the EU itself?
Does it reflect this vision of coherence?
In fact, does the European Union have a human rights policy?
This question does not challenge the efforts made by the Member States who wish to bring their viewpoints on foreign policy into line and to display a united front against violations of human rights elsewhere, for example in China.
No, Mr President, I am talking about the lack of human rights policy within the European Union itself.
A new government has come into power in Austria, comprising a political party which has sent out a message of racism and intolerance vis-à-vis minorities.
Human rights, which the EU embraces, are thus under threat, but the reactions to these events have brought to light the fact that there is no coherent framework in which an appropriate reaction can be formulated.
The widely quoted Article 7 of the Treaty, which provides for the repeal of membership rights from a Member State where serious and continuous violations against human rights have been established, is, of course, only a kill or cure remedy, an ultimum remedium, which, in the case of Austria, can only be quoted in the absence of anything more effective, and by way of warning.
There is, therefore a need for a fully-fledged human rights policy for and by the European Union, a policy which promotes and enforces human rights within the EU itself.
Such policy should comprise various components.
Firstly: a regulatory framework is needed, which spells out very clearly the rights which the EU intends to secure for its citizens.
A start is now being made on the drafting of such a charter, but we can no longer put off the question of legal status and the strategic significance of this document or pass it on to learned professional jurists.
This is a political question which, in the short term, requires an answer from the IGC and this Parliament.
Secondly: a range of instruments has to be developed which allow for a flexible response and which do not force us into a situation where we need to choose between a kill or cure remedy or a complete stab in the dark.
The following spring to mind in this respect: the systematic collation of documentation and information, professional forms of observation, the development of information campaigns, the use of cash to support democratic forces in the country concerned, a more creative deployment of the resources which are available through multilateral diplomacy, such as organised dialogue and fact finding missions and such like.
Thirdly: it will need to be made clear for each of the EU institutions where the responsibility for human rights policy lies within the European Union and what the tasks and competences are that this entails.
The Commission and the Council will each have to decide for themselves what these might be.
This Parliament is excluded from this, for our Rules of Procedure stipulate that the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs carries this responsibility.
But I am somewhat surprised that the resolution which should bring this debate on human rights to a conclusion has been prepared in the foreign sector of this Parliament and that the aforementioned Committee, of which I form part, has not been involved in this.
Mr President, this Parliament is fragmented and divided.
For the sake of our credibility, we will have to speak with one voice when it comes to human rights and not act as if human rights within the EU are different from human rights elsewhere in the world.
I think that this will benefit our credibility in the UN Human Rights Committee.
Mr President, what will it take to make the debate on human rights something other than what it is today: an ideological instrument which helps to enslave peoples rather than free individuals?
We must start by going beyond man, who is not the master of the universe, to the source of all genuine rights and civilised values, without which the eternal claim to rights always ends in tyranny and bloodshed.
We need, in the ancient and mediaeval tradition of Europe, to go back to the natural order of the universe, i.e. to the Creation, and beyond that still further, to the Creator' s intention.
Then we shall see that the rights of the child are only respected within a proper family, the rights of workers are only respected in the intermediary bodies which we have recently destroyed and that citizens' rights are only respected within sovereign states.
Secondly, the doctrine of human rights must no longer be exploited, as it is today, as an instrument of ideological warfare in the hands of a cast which claims the right to decree unilaterally who is to be the arbiter of human rights and who is to be deprived of those rights, thereby denying the legitimacy and, if need be, the freedom of those whom the party line has deemed politically incorrect.
'No freedom for the enemies of freedom' was what the advocates of the revolutionary Terror were saying two centuries ago, the advocates of the revolution which proved, alas, to be the mother of all modern totalitarian regimes.
No human rights for the enemies of human rights is what the acolytes of the new world order are saying today, the new world order which reigns almost unchallenged in financial circles, in international institutions, in the media and cultural networks, and in educational institutions, to mention but a few.
What is left, for example, of the right of Austrians to choose their own destiny, if that choice is dictated on their behalf by those who decide what should or should not be done and if their duly and legally elected leaders are received in an insulting manner, as they were recently by you in Portugal, Mr President of the Council.
I do not know if he is still present and can hear me.
What is left of the human rights of those who sympathise with the Vlaamsblok, one of the most important parties in the Flemish region, if tomorrow the Belgian Parliament adopts the implausible, indecent and ignominious bill tabled by its main political rivals, the Volksunie, which seeks quite simply to abolish the party?
What is left of the right to engage in a critical study of history when authors and publishers are persecuted, as the young historian Jean Plantin was just yesterday before the Court of Appeal, in my home town of Lyon - he was the subject of an absurd, arrogant and offensive closing speech by the public prosecutor Jean-Olivier Viout, the smug expression of straitjacketed thinking and intellectual conformism?
It is a strange concept of human rights when peaceful patriotism is fraudulently equated with aggressive nationalism, when legitimate protests against immigration policies are equated with I do not know what form of xenophobia and the vital defence of identities is equated with racism.
What of the human rights of the millions of French people who voted for the National Front and who are deprived of any political representation and vilified daily, as they were on Monday on the television channels of the state to which they are required to pay taxes, when the simple expression of justifiably exasperated views by one of our colleagues, Mr Le Pen, is used as a pretext for iniquitous condemnation, in violation of the law and in violation of all notions of justice, fairness and morals, and when attempts are made, in violation of the clearest legislation, to deprive this representative of millions of our fellow citizens of the mandate which he has been given by their vote, not received as a favour from the government.
In a word, I shall believe your talk about human rights in Europe, fellow Members, when you acknowledge that your political opponents have the same rights as you allow yourselves.
I shall believe your talk about human rights in China when you name the real cause of the problem, i.e. Communism.
Listen to the resounding voice of Solzhenitsyn in his letter to the Americans, in which he says that the main cause of the weakness of Western society is excessive pandering to legal individualism, an individualism which, far from allowing people to flourish, paves the way for future dictatorship, in fact the worst kind of dictatorship, because those whom it enslaves are not even aware of their terrible servitude.
Mr President, the principle of universal human rights is undoubtedly one of the most important political legacies of the 20th century.
The holocaust, fifty years ago, led to the need to lay down a number of fundamental rights and freedoms.
Since the end of the cold war, compliance with human rights has also become a condition for international cooperation.
Leaders violating these principles now face international criticism, sanctions and are even brought to trial, such as ex-dictators like Mr Pinochet have experienced.
These developments are encouraging but do not detract from the fact that the situation of human rights in the world remains very disquieting.
Especially in situations of war, civilians are given less consideration all the time.
It seems contradictory.
Never before in history has humanitarian right been so well developed.
Never before have so many international treaties been ratified by so many countries.
Yet the most basic rules of conduct are being flouted on a massive scale and there are more civilian victims than there were a century ago.
Women are systematically raped.
Children are conscripted by force and deployed in battle.
Excesses are no longer the exception, they have unfortunately become the rule.
This applies today to no fewer than thirty conflicts worldwide.
Too late, too selective and too fragmented: this is how one could describe the human rights policy of the international community.
First of all, the policy comes too late.
Both in Rwanda and Kosovo, the UN, despite the many warnings, appeared to be overtaken by events and stood by as a helpless observer of the massacres, as President Havel pointed out this afternoon.
Fifty years later, we are still unable to prevent genocide.
We should therefore direct more attention to monitoring and conflict prevention as a matter of urgency.
Control of the arms trade and improved media control are essential in this.
The human rights policy is also too selective.
The months of NATO bombardments of Kosovo and the mediation attempts in the Middle East are in stark contrast to international apathy with regard to the conflicts in Africa.
I cannot shake off the impression that, when it comes to human rights, despite all the rhetoric, Africa does not feature on top of the agenda of the Portuguese Presidency. This is something which I very much regret.
The impression that Africans get, namely that they are inferior world citizens, is not unfounded.
I would like to warn against a blurring of standards in the assessment of human rights situations in Africa, where violations are viewed as a necessary evil.
But above all, the human rights policy is too fragmented.
We are unable to draft a common strategy within the international communities or Europe.
Take Sudan.
The international community is sending conflicting messages to this country.
Britain has re-opened its embassy in Khartoum.
Canada has invited the Sudanese for peace talks.
Europe puts the rebels in the South under pressure to negotiate and at the same time, Americans isolate the regime and support the rebels at military level.
There is a need for more coordination, more exchange of information and a more coherent approach whereby any raised bids are avoided.
Only then can we follow in the footsteps of the founders of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
Mr President, I would like to start with the fact that if words could solve the problems we could all pack up and go home.
But unfortunately, as we speak today in the safety of this Chamber, human rights abuses are occurring throughout the free world.
Sometimes the more we speak, the less we hear - motions: words; conventions: words; treaties: words - if we are not careful, words themselves become a substitute for real action.
Words framed in inclusive and liberating documents become treaties and conventions which are often paraded as a testimony to a country's respect for and adherence to human rights.
Yet words spoken, written or signed are not in themselves enough.
Look at the signatories to the conventions on human rights and minorities and then compare the treatment received by such minorities, groups and individuals - the list is shameful and shaming.
Can anyone argue with any persuasiveness that women are treated equally and fairly, that children have human rights or that people are not discriminated against because of their religion, belief, gender, disability, age, sexual orientation, opinion, political affiliation etc?
The defamation of minorities in newspapers and other media fuels discrimination.
Even within the EU citizens still suffer human rights violations and a breach of our conventions.
Every day in the press misinformation and misrepresentation are used to deny some minorities equality before the law and to denigrate ethnic minorities.
Quite frankly a hierarchy of oppression has been created.
And so long as people do not have equality before the law, this inequality will lead to discrimination and human rights will be eroded.
