It seems to me that we need to give this some thought, as these cases will no longer fall to the Court of First Instance of course but to the Court of Justice as draft decisions.
We need to consider how we will deal with situations of this kind.
Where possible, one should also have the opportunity to present draft decisions in competition cases to the specialist chamber within the Court of First Instance.
In addition, we must consider whether it is right and proper - and we have already had cases in which MEPs, not to mention groups, lodged a complaint against the European Parliament - for the Court of First Instance to be responsible for such cases, when in fact matters of a constitutional nature are affected and it makes more sense for such matters to be brought before the Court of Justice than before the Court of First Instance.
On a final note, I too believe that OLAF requires monitoring under rule of law.
As things stand, OLAF is in a vacuum and can do as it pleases.
It is essential for OLAF to be monitored by a court.
The only court that could reasonably do so would be the Court of First Instance.
That would be another way of spurring the reform process on.
Mr President, I would like to begin by joining those who congratulated the rapporteur on this work.
The European Union is a system based on law.
It must therefore have a system of courts to enforce that law.
Furthermore, if the courts cannot deal appropriately and expeditiously with the legal workload placed on them, what happens, as Madame Palacio Vallelersundi has already pointed out, is that justice delayed becomes, as we know, justice denied.
The evidence of the court is that that is happening now and it points to steps which can be taken now to alleviate the problem.
However, as Mr Marinho has pointed out, more is necessary, but that has to wait for the IGC,
In my own country, mythology tells of the teeming hordes of faceless Brussels bureaucrats but it never mentions the number of European judges.
There are less than three dozen at the apex of the European judicial order - hardly an overload given the responsibility of their tasks at the heart of the European legal system.
The extent of their importance can be seen in the political implications of the delay in resolving the outstanding Anglo/French dispute over British beef which has caused such anger in my country and such frustration with the workings of the Union' s disputes resolution procedures.
This has been compounded, so some who advise me believe, by the Rules of Procedure in the French courts which make it well nigh impossible for non-French nationals to proceed against the French Government.
Certainly it is perceived de facto to be impossible.
This contrasts most unfavourably with the United Kingdom courts where Spanish fishermen successfully brought an action against the United Kingdom Government in circumstances which were very comparable.
What is happening in France, Mr President, appears prima facie to be a case of discrimination against other EU nationals on grounds of nationality and as such to be in breach of the Treaties.
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner, who was kind enough to make some comments about my remarks in the previous debate, to look into this and to report back to Parliament and to me their findings.
I would be grateful if the Commissioner could confirm in his final remarks that he will do this.
Mr President, on behalf of Commission President, Mr Prodi, I would like to respond as follows.
The Commission has taken note of the position adopted today by the European Parliament regarding the request made by the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance. The purport of this request is, on the one hand, to transfer the assessment of certain appeals to the Court of First Instance, such appeals currently being within the exclusive scope of the Court of Justice and, on the other hand, to increase the number of judges at the Court of First Instance.
May I add that, on behalf of the Commission, I listened with great interest to the pleas which have been made just now and that I have a great deal of sympathy for the unease which underlies these pleas.
The unease is justified.
It has been said more than once: justice delayed is justice denied.
The Commission sympathises with these considerations.
In the light of this sympathy, I would like to continue my response as follows.
As your Parliament is aware, the Commission is convinced that, without fundamental reform, the Community judicial bodies run the risk - in the short term - of no longer being able to carry out their task within reasonable deadlines.
Consequently, the Commission has asked for the advice of a group of experts regarding the entirety of the reforms which could be implemented in order to enable the Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance to maintain the quality and coherence of their administration of justice in forthcoming decades.
The Commission is aware of the request made by the Court of First Instance to increase its number of judges, but at the moment, the former is of the opinion that the proposed transfer of competence should be seen in the light of the study which I have just mentioned.
In other words, once this study is complete, the Commission will issue its opinion as soon as possible.
Thank you, Commissioner.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place at 11 a.m. tomorrow.
Exceptional financial aid to Kosovo
The next item is the report (A5-0022/2000) by Mr Brok, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy, on the proposal for a Council decision providing exceptional Community financial assistance to Kosovo (COM(99)0598 - C5-0045/00 - 1999/0240(CNS)).
I have been informed that the rapporteur has been delayed for several minutes.
I propose that we start the debate immediately.
He will join us and speak as soon as he arrives.
I therefore give the floor immediately to Mr Bourlanges, in his capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets.
Mr President, this is an important and urgent matter, and Parliament is complying with a request from the Commission to come to a decision quickly, because today, you must realise, men and women are dying in Kosovo quite simply because the temperature is 25 degrees below zero, these people are doing a great deal of work to ensure a minimum of maintenance and they have not been paid.
An urgent request has been referred to us, and we approve it.
We have been asked for EUR 35 million.
We agree that it may be granted and we call on the Commission to be extremely vigilant in ensuring, once the decision has been taken, that the amounts are set aside and paid as quickly as possible.
We are talking about macrofinancial aid.
There are reactions to this in some quarters since it does not comply with the liberal canons of beauty which stipulate that there must be no financial intervention in order support an administration.
This is not our opinion.
Our opinion is that it is vital to contribute to setting up an administration in Kosovo and that it is by no means absurd to contribute directly to the payment of public employees in this region.
Indeed that is something extremely useful that we could have done in Russia throughout the 1990s to prevent the disintegration of that state.
The second important problem is that we have been asked for payments, the donors have made commitments and, obviously, we are the only ones actually paying.
The other parties are not paying.
We wish to see an end to this one-sided situation regarding requests for financial aid.
We would like the Commission to make commitments on the amendments we are proposing in regard to this.
We would like to link the granting of all aid to the availability of the amounts due from the other donors.
This is not in order to limit or be stingy with our financial contribution to Kosovo but, quite the contrary, to ensure that our contribution is being matched by the contributions of other donors.
From that point of view, the proposed facility is a two-phase aid facility and the second tranche must be released as soon as the donors have made clear their interest.
Finally, we have three questions for the Commission in this regard. Firstly, we need the Commission to give us, on a regular basis, the list and the amounts that other donors contribute.
When we come to pay, we want to know what the others are paying.
Secondly, we wish to see an exact progress report on the invitations to tender and the schedule for their implementation.
During the budgetary procedure we were told that the funds for Kosovo must be voted on as a matter of urgency yet, according to our information, no invitation to tender has been published or initiated to date.
This is serious, since it holds up the whole process of reconstruction in Kosovo.
Finally, and this follows on from what I have just said, we would like the Commission to inform the Committee on Budgets on a very regular basis, monthly, regarding progress on payments made.
We have Commission documents which speak of firm commitments.
It is not firm commitments that we need, just plain commitments would suffice, and we need to know what has actually been paid and, more especially, what has not been paid.
Kosovo has suffered far too much from delays in payment.
Mr President, if we are going to discuss Kosovo today, as we have done many times before, then we should also start by taking stock of what has actually already been done in Kosovo, or of whether in fact anything has been done at all.
What I mean to say is that a few small steps have already been made along the path to normality, and it would be nice if they could at least be listed in the course of such a debate.
As of 9 February, there will be something known as the Kosovo Transitional Council, which will comprise representatives of the political parties, the minorities and civil society, and which is intended to be a quasi interim parliament.
This is a positive move and we welcome it, but I believe we need to equip the individuals concerned with an instrument and with strategy planning for what they are actually going to have to prepare, for elections are planned for the autumn.
No one really knows what these elections are to lead to and what kind of parliament is to be formed as a result.
No one knows what kind of authority this parliament is going to have vis-à-vis UNMIK.
In other words, there are quite a few imponderables that we are not being informed about and that others are presumably unable to get to grips with properly either.
Of all people, it is the Albanians, who are now being integrated into the transitional council, who ought in fact to have a little more idea as to what is in store for them.
In addition to financial outlay and reconstruction work, urgent attention must also be given to restoring the coexistence of Serbs, Albanians and other minorities - not forgetting the Roma of course - in this country, so that at some point in the near future, on the road to coexistence, it will hopefully be possible for some form of reconciliation to take place.
I would like to list again the things that have actually already been accomplished and that we can be pleased about.
Administration-wise there are now 34 tax inspectors.
That is excellent news!
There too, people are being encouraged to pay their taxes, for it will not do in the long-term for everyone just to depend on handouts from the EU and from other donors; some of the money for these activities must come from their own resources.
It should also be noted that of the 19 departments, 4 already have administrative leadership, which represents an improvement on the situation there hitherto.
There is something else that we are keen to develop and this is very important for a state under the rule of law. We have 130 judges and public prosecutors, who have now been sworn in, and who are ready to take up their work of dispensing justice, with a view to enriching the culture of tolerance there a little, and to at least being able to track criminals down and then secure convictions.
Another positive development I would like to remind you of is the fact that the old UCK is now bound up in the reconstruction of the country.
I believe that is a good thing
I wholly endorse what the Committee on Budgets had to say on financing and believe that we should remind the Commission that it really must press other donors to at long last pay their way.
The EU Commission cannot pay for everything.
It is responsible for reconstruction down there and for the Fourth Pillar, but it cannot constantly be called upon to pay Mr Kouchner' s outstanding bills.
One could do so once or twice, but I feel that the UN donors should contribute to this as well, for there is a very large hole, as yet unfilled, that we are unable to fill.
We have a huge task in reconstruction and we will be judged according to how we fulfil it.
Mr President, I would like to offer a few explanations.
In a debate, there is always the danger that we will repeat much of what has already been said.
However, I would like to concentrate on two points.
Firstly, I would like to make it very clear that the Union is the main contributor to aid for the reconstruction of Kosovo.
I would like to point out to Mrs Albright that what we have read recently in the press is true, and that figures do not lie.
Let us make this clear, however much some people may not wish to believe it.
The Union has decided to assist with a further EUR 35 million in additional macrofinancial aid for the reconstruction of Kosovo, on the basis of an IMF report which estimates that a further EUR 115 million is needed for that reconstruction.
I would like to say to Mrs Pack that I am in complete agreement with her when she says that the Commission should insist that other contributors fulfil their commitments.
I would also like to express my concern - which is very considerable - at the statement by some Ministers at the last Ecofin that says that it should be a priority of the Portuguese Presidency not to alter, in any circumstances, the financial perspectives agreed in Berlin.
This calls into question the agreement which Parliament reached, with great difficulty, with the Council in December, according to which, when the Commission presents a multiannual programme for reconstruction, the financial perspectives would be reviewed where necessary.
I would like to appeal to those Ministers not to cast doubt upon that agreement which was really very difficult to reach.
I would like to ask the Commission - and I am glad that Commissioner Solbes is here with us this evening - to present us in time with this multiannual finance programme, with the corresponding report, requested by Parliament, so that it may be taken into account when the preliminary draft of the next budget is drawn up, as we have been promised.
Lastly, I would like to insist that, although we have agreed to EUR 35 million now, we know that this is a stopgap solution and that it is not enough, and we should therefore reach an agreement as soon as possible on the multiannual reconstruction programme for Kosovo, which is so badly needed.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, please excuse my late arrival, but this other political issue is still on the agenda today, more is the pity.
The Committee on Foreign Affairs, Human Rights, Common Security and Defence Policy would advise you to release the EUR 35 million, and this piece of advice is given because this money can truly benefit those in need.
The things that have given us cause for criticism are not so serious as to stop us wanting to help the people there.
However, this does not mean that we will forget the criticism in the process.
Of course we would be a lot further on in our procedure if the Council administration had not forgotten to inform the European Parliament in good time and to provide it with official documents.
Only then would we have been able to conduct proper and searching discussions.
I urge the administration to see to it that this does not happen in future.
It is only because there are people in need that we are prepared to overlook this.
However, we must be sure to introduce certain conditions here.
One condition is that money should be given to those who will make sensible use of it and not to those who might use it for pursuing other aims.
In other words, we should ensure that the money falls to Mr Kouchner' s sphere of competence and not to other spheres.
Secondly, even if the Commission and the Council adopt a different position on this because they see real problems there, we believe that the other donors must also fulfil the obligations they have entered into.
This mission is being conducted under the auspices of the United Nations and we cannot have a situation where the European Union is the only one to fulfil its obligations.
It is no less incumbent on the other donor countries to fulfil their obligations within this timeframe, in the interests of the persons affected.
This brings me onto the point that in future we are going to have to concern ourselves much more intensively with this issue in general terms, that is to say, not just with this specific project but with overall developments in south-east Europe, and with the aid delivered there.
This is another example of the fact that the European Union is prepared to help and to give money but the political leadership lacks coherence.
We have so many coordinators, who, in turn, are responsible to so many employers, that we will soon have to employ a coordinator for the coordinators.
Perhaps it would be better, however, if the positions of responsibility within the European Union and the other institutions from the OSCE to the United Nations, were to get together some time to introduce a uniform, coordinated procedure and to examine how we can be of real assistance to the people there.
I know that the Commission is thinking seriously about how to achieve this, but if the European Union is doing the most work out there, then it should also be given the leadership, and bring coherence to the situation, so that we can be of real assistance to the people.
It makes no sense at all for the various international institutions and associations to be engaged in competition amongst themselves rather than investing all their energies in helping the people on the ground!
Bearing in mind that the conference of donors for the stability pact is constantly being postponed - it is now set for the end of March - that no one knows which projects are actually in the pipeline, that one cannot tell how things can actually be implemented, and there is a steady stream of new press conferences, this does not appear to be the way to restore peace and reconciliation amongst peoples to this region of Europe!
Accordingly, we would like to take this opportunity to urge the Commission and Council Presidency to seize this political initiative, so as to avoid us landing in such a desperate situation again and having to restore our solvency at the end of a month. Rather, we must use this initiative to establish a long-term aid strategy for this country, and I hope that in the process, you will fulfil your political obligations at long last and not allow things to continue as they have been doing for the past few months.
Mr President, when the Alliance intervened in Kosovo its objective was to re-establish conditions in this province which would enable those who wished to do so to stay there or return, with respect for their own heritage and their own culture.
If the Alliance is still active in that region, it is with the same objective.
The day before yesterday I was pleased to hear an interview given by the KFOR commander showing how much better matters in connection with this in Kosovo were starting to be, particularly as regards security, crime levels had been restored to an acceptable level.
Those representing Europe who are active at the grass roots level in pursuing this objective, and I am thinking in particular of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, are on the verge of despondency precisely because, since matters are improving, there is less talk of Kosovo and the urgent nature of the aid which is needed there is becoming less apparent.
We must work to ensure that, in this province and indeed throughout the Balkans generally, the rule of shopkeepers follows the rule of the warlords.
It is true that economic aid is, in this respect, certainly an essential element to the scope of action afforded those people active at the grass roots level.
Let me reiterate the comment which Doris Pack has just made and stress that we, the Members of the European Parliament, must fulfil our own obligations in this regard, while ensuring, of course, that we are not the only ones to do so.
Mr President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, firstly I would like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur, Mr Brok, for his report.
If the Council had worked as quickly as Mr Brok then we would certainly be a great deal further on.
The Council' s failings in this respect are a source of much regret.
The rapporteur and the report are right to start from the premise that we should, and must, provide help swiftly, however it is also right to start from the premise that we will not provide help indefinitely or at random.
I would particularly like to draw your attention to Amendment No 5 at this point, which clearly emphasises that it is only possible, and permissible, to use the funds from the special financial aid to finance those Kosovan budgetary requirements arising from public or semi-public, communal and other authorities and institutions, which are controlled either directly or indirectly by UNMIK.
Commissioner, it must be made clear that we support UNMIK and the institutions set up by the United Nations, in particular Pillar 4 of course, and it will not do for us to support the parallel structures that have formed in Kosovo and are still in place.
What is to be done with this money?
I would like to highlight the issue of human rights.
The West fought for human rights in Kosovo and what is happening there today?
We were able to put a stop to the mass expulsion campaign carried out by the Serbs but almost every day insupportable things happen: people are killed, people are prevented from living there or are prevented from living their lives as they see fit.
Every single day there are attacks on Serbs, on the Roma, on Bosnians, but attacks are also still carried out on Albanians.
I was in fact shocked to read in the report, assuming this is true, how an Albanian doctor, who was working in the hospital in the Serbian quarter of Mitrovica under what must have been great difficulties, ultimately had to give up helping his kinsmen in this hospital because there were constant threats on his life.
These are events and situations that cannot be tolerated.
I hear - whether it is true or not I do not know - that the Serbs are even continuing to operate a mine in the Serbian sector of Kosovo.
There are, at the very least, rumours that Serbian militias are up to their old tricks again.
It is irrelevant, as far as I am concerned, as to whether it is Serbs, Roma, Bosnians or Albanians who are threatened or killed in Kosovo.
It is also irrelevant, in my view, as to who is working towards separation and division in Kosovo.
