But opinion differs as to the solution.
The Commission' s proposal does not formally deviate from the monopolies ban but the upshot of this proposal is a transition from a ban with permit reservation to a permit with ban reservation.
In other words, we are making the transition from the principle of banning to that of misuse.
Both I and other MEPs utterly reject such a drastic change of system.
I do not accept that a practical transposition problem should give rise to changing the law.
We would be changing the law to make it executable again, which is something I consider to be unacceptable.
The Commission is giving up its monopoly on exemptions.
Competition restrictions are to be automatically exempted against the background of this planned system of legal exemption, insofar as the provisions of Article 81(3) of the Treaty on European Union allow.
The requirement to lodge applications in Brussels will be dropped; in other words, the Commission will be completely in the dark in future.
This is unacceptable to my mind.
The Commission' s programme is to be supplemented by enhanced follow-up supervision of the national authorities and Member States' courts.
But if this takes place in the course of renationalisation then what we will have here is a patchwork quilt of competition policy.
This is unacceptable in my view.
It would weaken a key element of European policy.
The change of system in European monopolies law that the European Commission is contemplating is high risk as far as competition policy is concerned.
There are enough other options in the present system to safeguard open markets and free competition.
In any case, the Commission' s proposal refers back to old proposals that were put forward as long ago as the fifties and sixties.
There was no majority for this at the time.
Since France laid a huge amount of emphasis on legal exemption at the time, it was damaged by concessions in agricultural policy.
Forty years on, this proposal has again been placed on the table and I am certain that it will create room for manoeuvre for the monopolies, to the detriment of Europe' s consumers.
I consider this to be unacceptable.
Mr President, in this important debate on competition, I am speaking this morning with particular reference to Mr Langen' s document on the Steel Aid Code.
As the Court of Justice recognised in 1996, the steel industry is particularly sensitive to competition-related disturbances.
Indeed, several years ago, this was the conclusion of a report that I compiled on the strengths and weaknesses of the European steel sector.
This is why it was justifiable to set up a system of aid to this sector with the aim of ensuring the survival of successful businesses, even if this was in contradiction of Article 4 of the ECSC Treaty.
This indeed, is the aim of the sixth Steel Aid Code, but at the same time it is important to avoid any infringement of the conditions of competition and any serious disturbance of the markets, hence the importance of regulating such aid.
It is therefore necessary to continue to limit state aid for research, development, environmental protection and cases of company closure.
In the same category of ideas, it is essential that Member States fulfil their obligation to be accountable to the Commission for the aid granted to their steel companies.
The Commission suggests shorter deadlines.
I agree with this request.
Like the rapporteur, while I am pleased with the Commission report, nonetheless I deplore the fact that it does not cover all aspects of the aid.
Although the Steel Aid Code is expressed in a very clear way, the Commission has authorised granting steel companies aid which is not covered by the categories stipulated by the Code.
In the interests of equality, either the Code must be applied or it must be modified.
Finally, and in conclusion, Mr President, with the expiry of the ECSC Treaty, the regulations will have to be reviewed since I think that the aid system will have to continue beyond 2002, and in that case I am in favour of a Council regulation which will ensure security in this area.
We therefore await, and I await, the European Commission' s proposals on this matter.
Mr President, I am also going to refer to the report by Mr Langen, which concerns aid to the steel industry.
I agree with the rapporteur on two issues.
Firstly, I agree on the need to guarantee equal conditions for aid to all Member States and, secondly, on the need for transparency with regard to this aid.
We agree with the rapporteur regarding his criticism of the fact that, despite the rules laid down in the sixth Steel Aid Code, the Commission has frequently authorised aid to companies which do not correspond to the categories in that Code.
However, the thing that worries us most, Mr President, is the decrease in prices, by 30%, owing to imports.
The reason for this decrease is unfair competition from South Korea and Taiwan, in the case of steel, as a result of their different working conditions and conditions governing aid.
Orders in the steel industry and the ship-building industry - we also spoke about this a while ago - have decreased drastically, resulting in a loss of jobs.
I live in a region where the ship-building industry now has very serious problems: Asturias.
With global markets, we need global employment laws and global subsidies.
I know this is difficult to achieve now, but if we do not achieve fair employment laws for all workers, here and elsewhere, and we do not secure equitable subsidies for all countries, here and elsewhere, it will be difficult to preserve jobs in Europe and outside it.
Mr President, Commissioner, Director-General, I would particularly like to emphasise the following in relation to the von Wogau report: I welcome the Commission' s open-minded endeavours to initiate debate on the hitherto strict procedural rules, and to propose practical reform measures.
I congratulate the rapporteur Karl von Wogau, who takes up the theme but also makes quite plain his demand for clarification, indicates the accompanying measures that need to be taken, and pulls no punches when it comes to the problems currently under discussion.
The White Paper and the report are contributions made at the beginning of a necessary process of reflection, discussion, and reform which has yet to be concluded because there are still a few questions posed by ourselves, the judiciary, the Member States, and above all the SMEs concerned, that need to be clarified.
Competition policy must continue to be accorded central importance and will not be renationalised because this would jeopardise the internal market and Europe as a business location in a global economy.
However, it must be "europeanised" taking into account the principle of subsidiarity.
I also welcome, therefore, the fact that responsibility is to fall to the individual, without the Commission giving up any of its responsibility.
In practice, only 9 cases were rejected, 94% of the cases that the Commission had to process were not dealt with formally but by means of unpublished, non-legally binding administrative communications or on account of the expiry of deadlines, which clearly shows that the work of the Commission is subject to time-related, staffing and financial limitations in this age of globalisation and EU enlargement
To conclude, I would like to tell you what I am expecting from this reform: fair competition and equal competition conditions, legal certainty for all enterprises, consistent application of competition policy, procedural simplification according to the principle of the one-stop-shop, coordination of the national - and to me, independent - competition authorities, close cooperation between the national authorities and courts and the Commission, along with a clear distribution of competences between national authorities and courts in the application of European competition and monopolies law, and I expect the Commission to concentrate on what is most crucial in the fulfilment of its tasks as the supreme guardian of the European competition policies.
I am in suspense as to how the discussions, which were broadly based, will be incorporated in the first legislative proposal.
The Commission report confirms that, with the exception of Germany, state aid to businesses is increasing.
The Commission finds this worrying only from the point of view of the conditions of competition.
As far as we are concerned, we look at things from the point of view of the interests of the working classes.
Society gains nothing from these massive transfers of public funds to private business.
Take, for example, the car manufacturing sector, where subsidies and state aid of various sorts have increased by 24% during the reference period.
With what aim?
Not to save jobs.
All these firms have gone ahead with job cuts and even redundancies.
Not to improve working conditions, for in increasing production with fewer workers, working conditions are made worse.
Did these firms need state aid to survive?
No, car manufacturers have been making colossal profits for years.
State aid is not only counterproductive because, as the Jonckheer report acknowledges, it gives rise to subsidy hunting with firms relocating from one country to another, but it is unacceptable because it allocates public monies to the enrichment of a handful of private shareholders.
It is because the richest people are being favoured everywhere with state money that throughout Europe social protection is being reduced, public services are being abandoned, hospitals are being closed.
In voting against the Jonckheer report, I wish to assert the need for another policy, to wit, ceasing all aid to private firms and utilising the money thereby saved to develop public services and recruit staff.
Mr President, today' s debate is extremely important because the principle of competition has probably been the cornerstone of the internal market.
In accordance with the principle of competition, the legislation has implemented Articles 85 to 94, competition policy in the strict sense, and the revision of all state aid and tax provisions which may affect competition.
Firstly, fiscal provisions of an indirect nature and recently, thanks to Commissioner Monti, there have been direct provisions, the code of good conduct in particular.
This has worked fairly well, but, as in the famous film Casablanca 'time goes by' and we must adapt the legislation we have been applying until now to the new circumstances.
In this respect I have observed a significant consensus in all the interventions.
Firstly, it is necessary, in drawing up the legislation, to produce clear and complete rules.
It is probably horrendous, especially in this particular raft of legislation, that there are confused rules, regulatory vacuums and rules that only lay down undefined legal concepts.
This is all the worse - as is the case with the second part of this reform - when responsibility for implementing the legislation lies with national authorities.
Thirdly, it seems to me important that the Commission should play a role in resisting the temptation to create independent agencies which would distort the very essence of the Commission, in order to guarantee uniform application by international bodies.
Fourthly, and lastly - and this has already been mentioned - the international legal order has changed.
We have seen this in the aborted Seattle Conference and we are now seeing it in the bilateral conferences with different regions or countries of the world.
The principle of competition must now be universal in its application.
We must monitor compliance with environmental standards, employment standards, in order to prevent dumping in this area, and we must ensure scrupulous respect for property rights and the revision of state aid, which in many industries - as has already been said - distorts competition and destroys jobs within our own territory. To sum up, we should apply similar conditions that will prevent aid, internal distortions by other countries, from being transferred to the international arena, in other words, through trickery.
Mr President, Commissioner Monti, there is much that is good in Mr Jonckheer' s report on state aid for manufacturing industry and certain other sectors.
First of all the report reveals Parliament' s single-minded determination to reduce state aid to ensure that the internal market functions flawlessly.
Many of the report' s conclusions, however, are cause for concern, at least for our group.
For example, the fact that the amount and level of state aid calculated on a per capita basis vary considerably from Member State to Member State reveals the need for surveys such as this.
Aid that is based on the self-seeking ambitions of a nation gives companies unfair advantages, thus distorting competition and leading to an ineffective, uneconomic division of Europe' s meagre resources.
The form the aid takes is important.
Forms of state aid that require an effort from the beneficiary are to be supported.
For example, state guarantees, on which the Commission has just publicised its position, must naturally be considered state aid, but they are, in my opinion, a better option than granting aid directly to companies.
The report on competition policy further stresses the Commission' s confidence in hard and fast rules instead of putting the emphasis on economic arguments regarding efficiency, which affects competitiveness.
The European economy will never achieve the level of competitiveness desired if we do not show we trust in the markets.
If competition policy is to be made subordinate to the aims of social and environmental policy, real efficiency and economic growth will remain just a dream.
Competition policy has to be seen as part of the whole of the economy and it must be assessed with reference to trade policy and non-material rights: we should not just be emphasising its social dimension.
The aims of social policy can be best realised through stronger economic growth, not by making compromises with regard to decisions on competition policy.
Mr Rapkay' s report also emphasises the importance of the international dimension with regard to competition law.
In my opinion, it would be good if we could achieve consensus at the international level regarding certain basic principles of competition law.
Aiming instead at harmonised minimum standards will easily lead to a situation where we leap over the lowest hurdle and end up with the lowest common denominator, which will water down all the aims of competition policy.
Mr President, Mr Monti, the reform of competition rules calls for a commitment by the European Union, not only in the light and as a consequence of changes which have taken place through the years, but also with a forward-looking view to the Union' s enlargement.
I would like to thank the rapporteur, Mr von Wogau, for his commitment and I welcome his thoughts.
Moreover, I would like to say that I appreciate the remarks and observations that Professor Tesauro, Chairman of the Italian Competition Authority, sent me, and which I am sure Mr Monti will take into due account with a strong sense of collaboration.
Our real concern is undoubtedly to initiate further liberalisation of the market, and, above all, to achieve consistency between the different national markets. As things stand, there are considerable differences between them which come to the fore if we compare the English, Italian and French markets.
There is a large degree of state protectionism in the French market which is not found in the English market and is only present to an extremely limited extent in Italy.
Another issue concerns the economies of countries involved in enlargement, which may run the risk of remaining assisted economies for ever more if provision is not made for gradual adjustment.
In my opinion, we should also create a threshold below which two significant components which characterise our economic structure should be placed: small and medium-sized businesses, which bind the European economy together, and social protection, which Europe has always guaranteed to the weakest parts of the economy.
Safeguarding the social function of the market is what makes the difference between free trade, pure and simple, and a system for improving people' s quality of life.
A point to consider regarding the new rules concerns the economy of the outermost regions and islands, all of which must be protected.
We ought therefore to consider creating two focal points of an external market by instigating profitable relations with Russia and the Mediterranean countries, precisely so that their economies become less peripheral.
I hope - and I thank Mr Monti for this - that the new rules will reflect as many aspects of economic policy as possible and that their social function will be guaranteed.
Mr President, competition is at the heart of the European internal market policy and is also its driving force.
A free and open market can only exist by the grace of competition, marked by clear, uniform rules.
In his report, Karl von Wogau manages to capture this very well.
But Europe is changing.
The economies are growing, we are enlarging to 25-30 Member States.
The European Commission will become overburdened if it pursues its current policy.
It is therefore necessary to modernise competition policy.
This is not in question.
Having said this, I still have concerns about the proposed decentralisation.
How will the Commission, as keeper of the Treaties, guarantee that decisions are taken uniformly in matters of competition in London, Palermo, Helsinki and, soon, Budapest and Ankara?
This is necessary if legal inequality is to be prevented, and issues of competition will gravitate towards the court where the most lenient judgements are given.
It is not enough to say that, in the Member States, there is already 40 years' worth of experience.
In the Netherlands, the competition authority is still in its infancy.
This country has a very small market which, unfortunately, is often at the same time defined as the relevant market. This in contrast to Germany, where a very experienced Kartellamt is exercising its powers within a gigantic market.
The European Commission' s belief that, in all quarters of the Union, legislation will, almost as a matter of course, be interpreted in the same way, is what, within catholic circles, we term "foolhardy," and this is not allowed.
Uniformity needs to be worked on.
Think of specialist, national courts with the option of direct appeal to a special competition court at the European Court.
This special court in Luxembourg is necessary in order to build up broad expertise.
Moreover, due to the immense economic and social interests involved, we cannot afford to wait for a judgement to be pronounced two years after the event, as is now quite normal.
What is the Commissioner' s opinion of this?
I would like to finish off by making an important point for small and medium-sized businesses.
In order to grant small and medium-sized companies greater security, the European Commission itself needs to draw up an exemption regulation for small and medium-sized businesses so that, alongside vertical exemptions, horizontal exemptions will also be possible.
Through cooperation, small, independent firms must be able to stand up to the large chains.
It cannot be the aim of European competition policy to make life impossible for small businesses.
Moreover, regarding these small businesses, we will have to consider whether it would not be better to apply a system with a prior warning built in, the yellow card, instead of an immediate red card, which will be a large fine and will threaten the company' s very existence.
Mr President, being the last to speak gives me the privilege, Commissioner, of telling you that the majority of this House supports your initiative and has expressed a total, and, I believe, justified, confidence in you at the helm of this boat. But we all want to be oarsmen on it.
We all belong on the same boat and want to row with you.
I therefore believe it to be absolutely necessary to establish an interinstitutional dialogue so that we might reach a good conclusion and put all the finishing touches to this essential reform.
The many ideas which have been expressed here could be put into three broad categories.
Firstly, there is the concern that some have expressed, in particular Mrs Randzio-Plath, President of the Committee on Economic Affairs, of whether this new system of legal exception is absolutely compatible with the Treaty.
I share that concern and I believe that this issue should be addressed.
Secondly, we have the issue of companies' legal certainty.
It is true, Commissioner, that the Commission is not a machine for manufacturing legal certainty.
We all agree on this.
But it is nonetheless true - and this has been repeated from all sections of this House - that the European industrial fabric is composed of small and medium-sized businesses, and that the Commission often plays the role of auctoritas, of legitimising the nature of the internal market.
On this point I will give my opinion on something which Mr Karas said.
There have only been nine rejections.
But here I would like to call on my experience as a lawyer.
How often has a lawyer with two companies and one project, in the face of a Commission guideline given ex ante, changed that project in order for it to comply with the competition rules!
This is therefore an aspect to be considered.
Thirdly, we have the problem of the uniform application of Community law.
In this respect, the excellent speech by Mrs Thyssen cannot be improved upon.
