But we also need to be aware that it is by virtue of rational political stances, and flexibility in negotiations, that we are able to find solutions to the major disputes which have ultimately led to many tragedies in history.
Regardless of who is to blame - and we are not here to apportion blame, the relevant United Nations resolutions in this area are clear enough - I believe that we should take advantage of the opportunities that the new situation is opening up, in more of a rational way and less of an emotional one.
The European Council in Helsinki had the courage to take certain decisions, and I believe that various aspects of these decisions have already recognised the real value of these opportunities which, as I said at the beginning of my first speech, represent a window of opportunity.
We will not achieve concrete results during this stage of negotiations, which is a delicate and sensitive phase, by exploiting tensions.
No, we should continue to make progress by working discreetly to support the special representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations with his remit.
The European Union' s position on this is crystal clear, and I do not think it is worthwhile second-guessing particular phrases in the Council' s conclusions or in any other statement.
We do not play at political correctness in this House: we are concerned with fairness at international level and with concrete statements on this issue consistently defined by the Council over a period of time, and which the European Commission has also followed carefully, attentively and pragmatically.
So when we talk now about the need to involve the Northern Cyprus community in exchanges of information, particularly with a view to the eventual accession of the Republic of Cyprus to the European Union, we need to be aware that we are trying to find practical formulas that will enable us to overcome the obstacles standing in the way of a political solution.
We are not trying to deceive anyone and we are in no way trying to use practical solutions to create a model implying political recognition.
I believe that, over time, the Council of the European Union has clearly demonstrated that this is not how it sees this issue.
Decisions have been taken by the Council with a great sense of responsibility.
We believe that Helsinki was very clear in this respect.
The authorities of the Republic of Cyprus itself have clearly recognised that our relations with them regarding their accession to the European Union have been positive.
There is no point in second-guessing or trying to second-guess our intentions.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you all very much indeed for this debate, which all in all I have found to be encouraging and supportive, and it has also shown that there is a great deal of support in this House for the policy of the Member States and that of the Commission.
However, I would be more than pleased to elucidate a few points as requested.
I will turn firstly to matters pertaining to headings 4 and 7. It is quite simple: a special heading, namely, the famous heading 7, was created in Berlin, as part of the large Agenda 2000 package, for the applicant countries of Eastern and Central Europe, which are currently undergoing a process of transformation, and for these countries alone.
Malta, Cyprus and Turkey were not provided for at this stage.
Mrs Schroedter described this as a lack of coherence.
She ought perhaps to take some time to ask the erstwhile President-in-Office of the Council, who is not exactly a stranger to you, how this presumed lack of coherence has come about.
I have had a little to do with this too.
I do not believe this to be the case. The reason for this decision was, rather, that we wanted to have a special instrument for the Eastern and Central European States which, like Malta and Cyprus, are involved in the accession process, but under different conditions.
Nevertheless, I have said that I understand the arguments that people have been putting forward here and the Commission will endeavour to take account of these aspirations, but since this is all about Agenda 2000 and the Financial Perspective, we will not be able to do this without amending this Financial Perspective.
Hitherto this has been out of the question of course.
By way of clarification: if we transfer it across from heading 4 to heading 7 then this will have no effect on the overall balance of the budget.
If we do this, then heading 7 would be increased accordingly but heading 4 would be decreased by the same amount.
The idea that heading 7 could be added to in this way and heading 4 left alone, is not workable.
Parliament is no more able than anyone else to spend money that it has not got, at least not until we have a printing machine installed in the basement that we can use to print euro notes!
As for the peace process in Cyprus and how it is linked with the accession negotiations, I would reiterate that there has always been a direct connection between the two.
The Commission and the Council have long endeavoured to encourage the two communities in Cyprus to undertake joint projects.
So far, as you know, this has proved unsuccessful, and I have been asked if there have been any signs to the contrary.
Mrs Rothe, I would put it this way: I am convinced that there has been a distinct improvement in the framework conditions for reaching agreements of this kind.
I do not have confirmation of this at present, and nor do I expect it, since we have not yet held direct talks.
These will take place at a later date.
The framework conditions have changed in that the Helsinki decisions made a whole range of things possible that were not possible hitherto, and, above all, in that the political strategies employed by the parties concerned have changed beyond recognition.
I have always believed that the old line - i.e. not to admit Cyprus under any circumstances until the political conflict has been resolved - has a weak point in that it does not provide the Turkish community on Cyprus with a convincing incentive to properly involve themselves, for, with this strategy, the Turkish community would not need to do anything but sit back and wait.
There would then be no question of Cyprus acceding to the Union.
As matters stand, Turkey has to take seriously the fact that there is a risk of Cyprus being integrated into the European Union, and this would provide opportunities for prosperity and security for the Greek community whilst the Turkish community, whose level of prosperity is already far lower, would fall even further behind.
Therefore, it is my firm belief that, since Helsinki, there has been far greater incentive to link the accession process with the resolution of the conflict.
Indeed that was the idea behind it.
After only a few weeks, Mrs Rothe, it is still too early to deliver a verdict on this, but in any case, I have no grounds for assuming that the new line will fail.
As yet, we have no grounds for saying that we will actually succeed, but one thing I can say quite clearly is that the conditions that need to be in place for us to take a step forwards have improved considerably.
Finally, of course, the Cyprus question has a role in the discussions with Turkey.
I met the Turkish Foreign Minister in Brussels a few weeks ago and naturally I asked if Turkey could take a positive and constructive stance in relation to this issue.
I would just make one point: we cannot be 100% sure - I am not at any rate - that one only has to press a button in Ankara to set the wheels in motion in Cyprus.
It is very far from being that simple, rather we are going to have to make concentrated efforts, during talks with both communities, to encourage them to reach an understanding.
That is what we intend to do: the necessary measures and programmes are in place.
I must make it clear to you that we need this financial regulation, the one that has yet to be decided on here, before we can even get started.
The financial regulation is the legal framework we need to tackle the priorities established under the terms of the accession partnerships with Malta and Cyprus.
I cannot start anything while there is no regulation in place, because I lack the legal basis for doing so.
If the lamented lack of coherence should happen to have something to do with this point, then I am bound to say that this regulation is a legal framework and nothing more than that.
This legal framework is fleshed out in the priorities set by the accession partnerships that were adopted by the Commission and the Council last year and are now being implemented in the corresponding programmes and project management.
On the contrary, I would say that, although many areas of European policy leave something to be desired in terms of coherence, in this instance I would claim, on behalf of the Commission and the Council, that we have developed a very clear, transparent and coherent policy.
. (DE) Mr President, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, now that the Commissioner has explained to us, in an extremely coherent manner, that the erstwhile President-in-Office of the Council and his Minister of State for Europe bore responsibility for the lack of coherence, perhaps you could help the Commissioner and ourselves, so as to enable us to take this decision.
It would be helpful if you could give a positive answer to my questions on the Financial Perspective up until 2004 and on heading B7, or if you could at least confirm that the Portuguese Council Presidency intends to make efforts of this kind to make good the aforementioned lack of coherence, which is something the Commissioner will also seek to achieve on the part of the Commission.
. (PT) Mr President, I am sure that the issue raised by my friend Elmar Brok will be considered by the Council.
I feel that the criticism made of the previous presidency is not appropriate.
I believe that the work done by the previous presidency in defining the financial outlook was excellent, regardless of who was involved in that work.
In any case, the question that this raises is an important one and the Council will not fail to support the proposals that the Commission has presented in this respect.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, as I understood it, Mr Brok was actually referring to an earlier presidency still.
Mr President, I asked Commissioner Verheugen a specific question about the financing instrument MEDA but he has not provided an answer.
I would urge him to do so for his answer will determine the way in which we decide to vote on the various proposed amendments we have before us.
Forgive me Mr Poos.
There was a lack of clarity at precisely the point at which you put the question to me.
This is how matters stand with regard to MEDA: Malta and Cyprus can take part in the national programmes, but not in the country-specific ones, because the incomes are too high.
Thank you very much Commissioner Verheugen.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place on Thursday.
Question Time (Council)
Question No 1 by (H-0022/00):
Subject: Controlling access to Community waters for oil tankers In connection with the accident involving the oil tanker ERIKA off the French coast, which produced a large oil slick, what steps does the Council intend to take to control access to Community waters for tankers flying flags of convenience which do not meet Community safety standards?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, on 24 January the Council considered the consequences of the accident the previous month involving the oil tanker Erika.
At that time, bearing in mind the strength of public feeling about the disastrous consequences of this accident, the Council made known its concerns about the safety of oil tankers and the environmental protection that should go hand in hand with it.
The Council was fully aware of issues of this kind and of the need to take additional measures in this field.
It emphasised the importance of the Council taking new measures within a Community framework and in the context of its own work with international organisations.
As you know, as currently framed, Community legislation requires port authorities to carry out inspections on board all foreign vessels, including those flying flags of convenience, and to detain them if they do not comply with international standards.
There is a directive dating from 1995 on this subject.
With regard to the future, the Council noted that work within the Commission should shortly lead to the publication of a communication on the safety of oil tankers and of new proposals to strengthen controls, together with provisions on the qualifications of inspecting agencies.
There are also plans for a requirement to strengthen the actual structure of oil tankers visiting Community ports.
These dossiers will be progressed by the Transport Council and I can therefore assure you, on behalf of the Council, that we will not fail to give the highest priority to the proposals, which there is every indication the Commission is due to present in this area, which we regard as being a vital part of environmental protection.
This House will of course also be invited to give its views on these proposals, given that these are matters subject to the codecision procedure.
I am pleased that the Council is considering this question.
The President of the Council comes from a country, Portugal, which is directly at risk from just this type of situation.
If we stretched our imaginations, we could envisage a situation where, between now and next summer, an oil tanker may run aground under similar circumstances off the Algarve, wreck the Portuguese summer tourist industry, with a bit of luck the sea currents would carry the pollution towards the island of Madeira - because they move in that direction - and furthermore, wreck tourism in the Canary Islands as well.
Does the President of the Council not think that we should stop talking and implement tough measures in this area, bearing in mind that we now have the means to control this type of oil tanker on the high seas?
Of course, the story of the Erika seems comical.
A French-owned ship, under a Maltese flag of convenience, an Indian crew, a sea-worthiness certificate issued by Italy, in Sicily, with the last inspection carried out in Bulgaria, I think.
The ship was sinking and the captain realised that it was sinking and that it was not even going to make it to the next port.
This kind of situation should not be allowed.
The damage to your country, Mr President, and to mine, Spain, could be horrendous.
Mr Medina Ortega, I naturally share your concerns and I can assure you that a coastal country like my own, the country currently holding the presidency, is naturally very concerned about this issue, all the more so as it does not have any oil tankers of its own.
However, we have to work within the existing legislative framework.
That legislative framework is the 1995 directive, which has a set of regulations with a degree of flexibility which should perhaps be implemented more rigorously.
In this area we have to work with the world as it is, and that means reacting in accordance with the facts of the situation.
In view of the seriousness of such situations, we can congratulate ourselves on the fact that the authorities have at least reacted and undertaken to examine the legislative provisions already existing in this field.
The Commission' s intentions in this area are positive, as it intends to reinforce the application of the 1995 directive.
The Council is minded to give priority to this area, within the Transport Council, and we intend to follow this up as quickly as possible.
We also hope that the European Parliament will be able to examine this issue with equal promptness when it comes before this House under the codecision procedure.
Mr President, in Kotka, in Finland, there is currently a vessel carrying chemicals, which is sailing under a flag of convenience.
The vessel is anchored outside the port, as the condition it is in is a safety hazard for the port and the surrounding areas, and because it cannot be inspected properly, as there is no one who will pay.
Would it be possible for the EU to create a standardised inspection system that would also guarantee payment, out of Community funds, for the inspection of ships that fly a flag of convenience and cannot themselves pay the cost?
- (PT) Mrs Korhola, as you will understand, I do not at the moment have the information I need to give you a concrete reply.
The information that I have is to do with the 1995 directive, which does not include any provisions of that kind.
However, the Council will certainly let you have a concrete reply on the options available for acting in the case you have mentioned.
Question No 2 by (H-0024/00):
Subject: High infant mortality levels in Kosovo According to the most recent UN information forwarded to the World Health Organisation, Kosovo has the highest rate of infant mortality in Europe. About 50% of premature babies do not survive and the war has resulted in a massive increase in the number of miscarriages.
Even babies born when due tend to be underdeveloped.
In view of the humanitarian aid being given by the European Union and the efforts being made by the head of the interim administration, Mr Bernard Kouchner, what measures will the Council take to defend the rights of the women of Kosovo to motherhood and to protect the health of pregnant women, women in confinement and new-born children?
Mr President, Mrs Karamanou' s question is an extremely serious one, and I would not wish to conceal that fact.
We are perfectly aware of the difficult and dramatic humanitarian situation in Kosovo and of the problem of displaced people in that region - and I mean people who originate from Kosovo - and of the particular effect of this on child health and on mortality rates.
I think it is well known that the European Union has made a clear contribution to the humanitarian aid effort being made by the international community.
As you know, the European Community has contributed a total of EUR 378 million for the province of Kosovo alone, and this has to be seen in conjunction with the contributions made by Member States at national level.
This contribution covers various projects in the fields of health and health systems and of water purification.
Furthermore, as you know, the European Union makes a contribution to the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, which came to EUR 66.3 million in 1999.
I think that Mrs Karamanou is aware that, because of the need for division of labour between the international donors, the task of restoring health care in Kosovo has been entrusted to the World Health Organisation.
The reports produced by the WHO indicate that it is fully aware of the alarming infant mortality situation, and it has focused its efforts on improving basic conditions in maternity and general hospitals.
Nevertheless, we are aware that this situation is far from a satisfactory solution and that there are widespread repercussions in other areas of health care, apart from child health.
This is not just a technical situation, it is a political situation, and it goes hand in hand with the need to solve the political situation, because there are aspects to this, and we may as well be open about this, which are associated with the international community' s inability up to now to make a multi-ethnic society function in Kosovo, with tragic effects on attempts to improve health care in that region.
Mr President-in-Office of the Council, I thank you for your answer which supplements what Commissioner Patten said yesterday on the subject.
Yet, the sum of EUR 378 million you mentioned had been given in 1999, was proved by the facts to be quite insufficient to create even rudimentary civilised conditions in Kosovo, especially where the provision of health services is concerned.
Mr President-in-Office, do you not think that the very fact of increased child mortality is an abomination for the continent of Europe, a shameful thing, which should motivate us all, so that the aid we provide becomes more effective and more generous?
Of course, the situation was not idyllic, even before the bombardments, anything but, I should say. However, since NATO' s intervention, there has been a very clear deterioration in the natural and human environment.
So, Mr President-in-Office of the Council, is it not a moral obligation that we should try to create civilised conditions for the long-suffering inhabitants of Kosovo, and above all, keep our promises to them?
Mrs Karamanou, I recognise the fact that all the efforts that have been made in Kosovo in this field have not been enough.
I do not think that any of us has the least doubt about that.
I do not want to link this question with your comments about the period "before" and "after" NATO' s intervention, as we will probably touch on that issue at another point during this Question Time.
Nevertheless, I would like to say that the European Union is aware that the resources it has devoted to Kosovo reflect the financial limitations it has to work within.
We have to remember that we share responsibility in that region with the international community.
The European Union has a certain responsibility in view of that particular role, but we cannot undertake to rapidly rebuild structures that were, as you have said yourself, Mrs Karamanou, not the best before the military action in Kosovo.
What is more, I do not believe, Mrs Karamanou, that the military action in Kosovo resulted in such a significant destruction of public health facilities as to have had a direct impact on the current situation.
The present position is more dramatic in terms of displaced populations, and in terms of a whole raft of economic factors and of the level of satisfaction with basic health facilities resulting from the overall breakdown in organisational structures in Kosovo' s administration.
This is the basic issue underlying the present situation as a whole.
And if we cannot solve the political problem, which must be done in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolution, then we will not solve the problem of child health, nor the various other problems faced by this region.
I would like to widen the debate and include the situation in Mitrovica.
In cooperation with Europe, the international community rebuilt the hospital there too, but it is located in the northern part of the city, thus prohibiting access to Albanian Kosovars.
This means that medical aid is still denied to the Albanian Kosovars.
This is also happening elsewhere in the country, causing tension between the Albanian Kosovars and Serbs, making for a situation where nobody trusts anybody anymore and where Albanians do not want to be looked after by Serbs and vice versa.
I understand very well what you are saying and you are right: the European Union should work in a wider context of international cooperation.
But where will you place the emphasis?
What will you do to ensure that Albanian Kosovars too can be cared for in a hospital, including that in Mitrovica?
Mr Staes, the situation in Mitrovica is well known.
This is a very special situation with a degree of inter-ethnic tension which fortunately is not matched with such severity in others parts of Kosovo.
I perfectly understand Mr Staes' s concerns.
Nevertheless, I would like to say that Bernard Kouchner' s work in this area has aimed to comply with the objectives of the relevant United Nations resolution, in an attempt to create multi-ethnic facilities which can serve the various communities, including the various aspects of the administration.
I believe that we should not jump to conclusions here about who is responsible, because there are various protagonists involved.
The situation in Mitrovica is appalling, and involves very special tensions, and I believe that the measures taken over the last few hours to create safe conditions in that area are to be welcomed.
Nevertheless, I have to say that, regrettably, we do not have the police resources - and this is connected with the Member States' contributions - to guarantee the follow-up action we proposed to the military action, that is to say the establishment of inter-ethnic coordination mechanisms guaranteeing adequate safety for the various communities, and, in particular, access to hospitals.
Question No 3 by (H-0027/00):
Subject: Indictment of NATO before War Crimes Tribunal Human rights organisations, such as the US Human Rights Watch, have already collected significant evidence of NATO crimes in connection with the bombing of Kosovo and Serbia with a view to bringing a case before the War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague.
On the basis of this evidence, some of which has already been lodged with the Tribunal, NATO is accused of 'serious violations of international humanitarian law' and 'wilful murder'.
