Patently we have here an instrument that is appropriate for the policies which we wish to implement.
I would stress the LIFE-NATURE strand in particular.
We are well aware that, in the European Union, a whole raft of directives such as the directive on habitats and the directive on migratory birds encounter problems in implementation. With LIFE-NATURE we should be able to support policies which demonstrate the feasibility, the validity of the objectives of these directives, and their capacity to be implemented.
And, for want of appropriations, we lose this legitimacy and allow the idea that these European directives of ours are not reasonable and are not applicable to develop.
And so the debates taking place today focus on two major issues: firstly, comitology, an ongoing debate within this House, but Parliament wished to implement policies settled rather by management committees or advisory committees which give the Commission some flexibility and which do not give the Council too much scope to obstruct and have their intergovernmental philosophy prevail over the Community philosophy which we are here to stand up for within the European Parliament.
But we have these comitology debates with regard to most of the European Union' s financial programmes and instruments.
I would say that in my opinion - and the experiences we have had in the past tend to show this - that reconciling opinions on comitology is rather easier than reconciling opinions on the budget.
Let me point out that Parliament is asking for 850 million ecus in appropriations, not a vast sum in the Community budget, and that the current proposals are for 613 million ecus.
I feel, at any rate, that for the ultimate application of LIFE, at least, there would be some way for the Union to make a significant budgetary gesture in favour of the environment.
Let me conclude with the matter of our institutions' way of working.
This is the essence of how I understand the situation: we are being told that it is essential for us to reach a conclusion quickly, that, basically, the Members of Parliament should drop their claims, particularly claims on the budget, for if we do not soon, in line with the codecision procedure, get around to establishing the framework of the regulations for LIFE, then its implementation for the year 2000 is going to suffer a delay, and in the meantime the NGOs and the operators at grass roots level are waiting for our appropriations.
I would, however, like to point out that the Council has plenty of time to formulate its ideas and that it is submitting its proposals to us only a few months before the fateful date.
As for us, we our bound by the terms of the texts: a maximum of four months.
We meet our deadlines and afterwards we are told that we should hold on and that in order to be reasonable we must go along with the position of the others, because in the codecision procedure there is just not enough time.
I think Parliament often protests about this method, not to point the finger at any specific party within the Council, and I certainly would not want the Portuguese Presidency to feel responsible for this state of affairs, since, the truth is, it is something of a tradition, which the Council has kept going for a long time.
But I should like to stress the fact that, on this issue of the environment, the budget issue is a central one and Parliament cannot yield to the blackmail which requires it to be the only reasonable party in the deal.
I therefore hope, firstly, that our fellow Members will support us in the conciliation - but votes on this area are always very much in agreement - but also that the Council and the Commission will manage to listen to us and that we shall each take a step towards the other.
Mr President, it is true that we are in open disagreement on some of the choices made by the Council and the Commission, and I will refer to this later on.
It is equally true, however, that we should begin by saying that this regulation is better than those covering LIFE I and LIFE II.
It is better firstly because the framework proposal made LIFE I more rigorous, more transparent and more rational.
Secondly, it is better because the common position includes some fundamental recommendations, which were advocated by the European Parliament at first reading. Specifically, these are: to promote employment as a factor to be taken into consideration when selecting candidate projects, and to reduce the environmental impact of products at every stage from production to recycling and elimination.
This is one of the aims that LIFE-Environment must achieve. Thirdly, the fact that the common position has for the first time introduced upgrading and planning for coastal areas as one of LIFE-Environment' s priorities is an extremely positive step.
In spite of all its virtues though, LIFE III' s regulation fails in what is obviously the most important aspect of determining a financial instrument' s impact, which is its budget.
By persisting with their proposal of EUR 613 million as a reference amount for 2000 - 2004, and by refusing to accept the European Parliament' s proposal of EUR 850 million, the Commission and the Council are taking a decision which we do not feel is based on the same criteria of rationality and justice that they introduced, and rightly so, for other measures in LIFE III.
We want the Commission and the Council to know that we will not give up trying to provide LIFE with the budget it deserves and which best guarantees the environmental results that we are seeking to achieve with this kind of instrument.
We have four very straightforward arguments which we feel justify our choice.
Firstly, LIFE is the only direct financial instrument which is designed to promote environmental policy within the European Union.
There is no other such policy.
Secondly, LIFE is an instrument that has already produced good results, and has enabled innovative methods and techniques to be developed and has an excellent rate of implementation.
Thirdly, the LIFE budget has been reduced in real terms has not kept up with the enormous dynamism and creativity of demand.
Fourthly, as Parliament ascribes so much value to LIFE, it has allocated ever-greater appropriations to this project in its annual budget.
This means that approving the proposal put forward by the Council and by the Commission would represent an unacceptable reversal of this trend.
Our concern does not centre purely on the budgetary issue, however.
Climate change and water policy are subjects that are of great concern to the European public and which have deserved considerable attention from this House.
We therefore feel it is crucial that as Amendments Nos 5 and 6 seek to establish as objectives which LIFE-Environment should achieve a plan for the sustainable management of ground water and surface water, as well as for reducing greenhouse gases, they should be adopted.
Lastly, I would like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on her report and to take the opportunity to say to her that we will be voting in favour of her amendments on comitology even though, as was made clear in the Committee on the Environment, we would prefer LIFE to have been monitored by an advisory committee, we do want to contribute to allowing the solution proposed by the Council to be accepted as quite frankly, it was worse.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, LIFE is the European Union' s most important instrument and indeed its only financial instrument dedicated exclusively to the environment.
That explains why this instrument must live up to our ambitions, ambitions for which, of course, there is a price.
Obviously, the basic item for discussion with the Council will be the allocation for LIFE III.
The common position stipulates a total appropriation of EUR 613 million for the period 2000-2004. This is not enough.
The Group of the European Liberal, Democrat and Reform Party is in favour of increasing this amount to EUR 850 million.
We therefore support Mrs Lienemann' s amendment which observes that the allocation for LIFE was not increased when the Union was last enlarged, without even mentioning the next batch of new arrivals.
The amount that we are asking for is no great mountain of useless expenditure.
Quite the opposite, it is still fairly modest in relation to the requirements to be funded.
A drop in the ocean, I might say, in comparison with Europe' s structural policies.
The environment is still the poor relation in the European budget, even though it is primarily an investment.
An investment in natural resources, of course, but also in employment, since it has been demonstrated that an active environmental policy generated new jobs, as shown particularly by the great success of LIFE, a success with NGOs, businesses, local authorities and third countries.
More than one third of the 8,500 requests received meet the required conditions and it has been possible to cofinance approximately 1,300 projects between 1992 and 1998.
A success which Parliament wishes and intends to see perpetuated, and this is why we also support amendment 14 outlining the fourth phase of the LIFE project.
In matters of the environment, investment and ambition come in a variety of forms, and indeed must come in a variety of forms in the long term.
This is the price of the future of generations to come.
Mr President, Commissioner, I am probably going to repeat things my fellow Members have said but I believe that, as far as the Council is concerned, the thing is to repeat over and over what we think of LIFE.
I shall therefore reiterate that, as the rapporteur has already said quite clearly, LIFE is the only specific financial instrument for the implementation of the European Union' s policy on the environment.
This instrument is absolutely essential since it provides the impetus for truly innovative actions in favour of nature and the environment in Europe, which are adopted and expanded upon by the Member States.
This financial instrument is, furthermore, deliberately democratic since it is accessible to both governmental and non-governmental organisations.
That is why, ladies and gentlemen, I would urge you not to vote in favour of the amendments which have no appreciation of the spirit of LIFE.
Through the associations, then, LIFE is a facility that can be used by the European citizen directly, and for the benefit of actions in the interest of the community.
Several million NGO members - millions, I say - recognise in LIFE the Union' s determination to build up an ambitious policy in favour of our natural heritage.
LIFE is, moreover, the fundamental instrument of the Natura 2000 network in Europe into which the Member States have put a lot, pursuant to Community directives on the habitats of rare and endangered fauna and flora and on migratory birds, and which makes it possible to set up the protection of sites of high biological value in our States.
I should like to say that those who run down this policy in their own States bear the responsibility for obstructing European nature conservation policies.
This is a pity because everyone within this Chamber knows that LIFE is a financial instrument which is not sufficient to carry out the projects submitted by Member States, a good many of which are turned down due to lack of funds.
Let us not forget that, to date, LIFE amounts to only EUR 100 million per annum, i.e. scarcely 0.1% of the budget of the European Union.
For the record, the budget for agriculture, which has a real impact on the environment, amounts, as we all know, to EUR 37 billion.
Against this background, my group thinks it essential to increase the allocation to LIFE and unreservedly supports Mrs Lienemann' s proposal to increase the budget to EUR 850 million, since we know, and I think it bears saying, how high the expectations of our fellow citizens on environmental matters are and how excessively cautious and unacceptable the Council' s compromise regarding the budget for LIFE is, especially as the LIFE programmes show exceptional implementation rates and have demonstrated the extent to which they made it possible to bring about new environmental practice.
The first sustainable development projects are unquestionably those.
Mr President, the European Union environmental programme, to which a considerable amount (EUR 613 million) has been allocated, gives rise to many questions regarding the proper use of public funds.
A financial instrument of this order ought to be transparent and effective, and this is not the case for the following reasons: poorly defined selection criteria, dubious uncoordinated operations, assessments not made public and the lack of any assessment policy.
We are therefore proposing to amend the regulations as follows.
Firstly, to reserve the acquisitions made thanks to LIFE funds exclusively to public bodies, subsequently, following invitation to tender, to entrust the management of these sites to authorised nature conservation associations.
It is a question of the continuity of the ownership of the acquisitions, since private law associations may disappear or resell acquisitions.
It is shocking in philosophical terms and dubious in legal terms for 100% public money to be used to build up a heritage of private land ownership, even under cover of environmental protection.
Secondly, to define the criteria for the eligibility and allocation of LIFE funds, in order to rule our any suspicions of clientelism or ostracism.
Thirdly, to make prior coordination with the users and communities concerned a prerequisite.
For example, the LIFE-Nature project in France, at Grand-Lieu Lake, planned without any coordination, led to a real ecological disaster, the de-silting operation which was carried out without regard for French law on the subject caused significant silting of the Acheneau, a water course located downstream, destroying spawning beds, filling wetlands, and who knows what else.
The silt was in fact shifted 3 kilometres, at a cost of FF 6 million, the cure being worse than the disease, and a consequence that was foreseeable and actually predicted by the parties involved with the site.
Result: a court action and repair costs greater than the cost of the programme itself.
This is the sort of thing that we want to avoid.
Four, to include representatives of Parliament in the monitoring committee, at least one Member per political group.
What could be fairer than for Members of Parliament to monitor the use of the appropriations they voted for?
Fifthly, to publish an annual scientific, technical and financial assessment of LIFE operations carried out.
Six, to carry out proper evaluation of the programmes on a regular basis.
Seven, to make it possible for these funds to be used in the event of an environmental emergency: for example, in reforestation following storm damage, or restoration of the natural environment following an oil slick, etc.
Here, Mrs Lienemann, Mr President, we are putting forward here a practical proposal, a common sense proposal, easy to implement, likely to limit local conflicts and to vindicate the proper use of public monies, before increasing the LIFE budget line by as much as 40%!
Mr President, Commissioner, I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on the report she has carried out, and also the Commission - why not? - because this report, this position, generally improves on the texts in force.
Furthermore, it contains more acceptable systematics and is clearer and more transparent.
I would also like to congratulate the services of the Commission, since the evaluation, control and monitoring of the LIFE programme provide a reasonable guarantee with regard to the selection and execution of projects.
However, I would like to insist on certain points.
Firstly, its continuity, which, in principle, I am not questioning.
Secondly, the financial contributions.
Sadly, only 7.2% of the projects requested receive funds.
Of the EUR 1 919 million requested, only EUR 784 million have been granted.
Now the financial statement shows only EUR 613 million to cover more countries and competences.
Parliament has proposed EUR 850 million, but the document repeats the initial proposal of EUR 613 million.
Commissioner, our environmental commitments are increasing in all areas, while the only financial instrument exclusively dedicated to the environment is decreasing.
Is this not a contradiction?
Let us not demand from others what we are not prepared to give ourselves?
Why do we all go on about the environment and are then not prepared to pay for it amongst all of us, but rather expect the usual people, the ones who live there all year, to pay for it and maintain it?
Commissioner, we must be consistent.
The cost of maintaining the environment, which we all enjoy, must be met by all of us, and the LIFE programme is the only financial instrument aimed exclusively at the environment and whose projects have generally been effective.
Mr President, LIFE has been the principal instrument available to the Community since 1992 for supporting and developing environmental policy, both within the Community and in the surrounding third countries.
On the basis of the experience gained over the past eight years, an attempt is being made to increase the effectiveness of action on behalf of the environment in the third development phase of that financial instrument.
The funding of activities for the implementation, adaptation and development of Community policy in the environment sector and the incorporation of the environment in other policies, particularly ones that contribute towards sustainable development, are central elements of the regulation we are to vote upon.
An important element of LIFE-Nature, which mainly concerns the realisation of the Natura 2000 network, is the introduction of a multinational approach to formulating plans for international projects and activities, so as to avoid the fragmentation of biotopes and to offer better protection of biodiversity.
In the second, LIFE-Environment strand, which is more concerned with projects involving small and medium-sized enterprises and local government agencies, the incorporation of the environment in other policies is expressed very clearly indeed.
As regards the financing package for the implementation of LIFE over the next five years, I wholeheartedly support the increase from EUR 613 million to EUR 850 million proposed by the rapporteur, Mrs Lienemann.
Unless the necessary means are secured to pursue environmental protection, there is no point on the one hand in continuing to raise the environmental awareness achieved in recent years, and on the other hand in incorporating the environmental dimension in other policies.
Besides, we cannot remain indifferent towards the increased challenges in areas around the Union or towards addressing very acute environmental protection problems in the applicant countries.
What has happened over the past few days with the pollution of the Danube and its tributary has been instructive.
Consequently, I consider that support for environmental action under the LIFE financial instrument will help to further Community policy in the environmental sector and can contribute substantially to fulfilling the Community' s mission of achieving a high level of environmental protection and improvement.
Mr President, I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Lienemann on her sensitive approach towards the environment, ably demonstrated in the two reports we have discussed this evening.
Two minutes is certainly not long enough to deal with such an important topic.
So I will simply appeal to the Commissioner to undertake full responsibility for such an important issue.
For five years, I have been the representative of the Committee on the Environment in a regional organisation, which assuredly does not have Parliament' s broad perspective.
The environment is in a parlous state.
Like a number of previous speakers, I, too, wish to consider the economic problem and the problem of finding funding for projects, which, in my view, should be incorporated into the pubic domain.
As regards funding, EUR 613 million is not enough. Even EUR 850 million is not enough.
At the end of August 1999, I took part in a meeting of the Committee of the Environment in which it was said that EUR 2 million, or ITL 4 000 billion, should go towards eliminating or, at any rate, reducing smoking.
However, the environment constitutes a far bigger and more serious problem than smoking.
EUR 850 million - assuming that such a figure is actually agreed - believe me, is not enough, in practical terms, to allow any type of project to be carried out.
In many areas the parks which are a fundamental element in the LIFE programme have been established.
But creating parks with very limited financial resources, without any system of signs is inefficient and ineffectual.
I would therefore ask Parliament and the Commission to give the matter their full attention.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, ever since the beginning of 1999, discussions have taken place between the institutions on the subject of the proposed regulation for a third stage for the instrument for the environment known as LIFE.
I would again thank the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and Mrs Lienemann for the good and constructive co-operation we have had on this matter.
As a result of this, I can confirm that the Commission wholly or in principle approves nine of the fourteen amendments which have been adopted by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
The Commission welcomes, above all, Amendments Nos 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 13, which apply to the Committee procedures.
In these cases, Parliament has fully taken account of the objections which the Commission had to the common position.
The Commission can, in principle, also approve Amendment No 4 which ought, however, to be introduced into another place in the text.
With regard to Amendments Nos 5 and 6, I want to emphasise that projects for the sustainable exploitation of groundwater and surface water, together with projects for reducing forms of air pollution which contribute to the greenhouse effect, are to a large degree covered by LIFE.
The Commission nonetheless considers that, if this is stated separately, then that is to go against the original decision to have the proposal focus on just a few priority areas.
There is also a risk of overlap with other Community programmes such as the Fifth Framework Programme for Research, Technical Development and Demonstration.
The present programme' s key measures - water quality, tomorrow' s city and innovative products and processes - to a certain degree cover the same questions.
Where the question of the budget is concerned, I am pleased about the confidence shown by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy.
Amendment No 12 requires a larger budget than that stated in the common position.
I am also convinced that LIFE has great potential.
This instrument could finance good projects with a higher amount of money than that quoted in the proposed budget.
The amount quoted in Amendment No 12 does not, however, tally with the budget set on the basis of Agenda 2000.
Allow me also to add that, if the budget is increased, greater demands are obviously going to be made upon the Directorate-General for the Environment if an increased number of projects are going to be dealt with.
Account will also have to be taken of other programmes where decisions are to be made within the framework of the joint decision-making procedure.
At this stage, the Commission is keeping to the amount which has been set in the common position.
With regard to Amendment No 3, which we did not approve at first reading, I want to emphasise that each programme has its own objectives, conditions under which it may be applied for and costs which make it eligible for aid.
It is therefore meaningless, and often impossible, directly to transfer projects from LIFE to other instruments.
If other sources of finance were to be investigated for each project, more resources would, moreover, be required than are available in the present situation.
Now that the Commission has to consider carefully what resources are required for each activity, this is an example of the kind of activity we ought to avoid: one that is inessential but demanding in terms of resources.
Nor can the Commission approve Amendment No 14, which is contrary to the Commission' s right of initiative.
With regard to the discussion concerning the deadline, I want to say that the final date for beginning to implement LIFE - 31 March 2000, as set in the common position - must now be moved forward.
The date will be fixed as soon as the present regulation has been adopted.
Finally, I want to repeat that I am convinced that LIFE will be an effective instrument in support of development and the implementation of the Community' s environmental policy.
Parliament has contributed greatly to improving this instrument.
I am convinced that you share my wish that it should be possible to adopt the regulation as soon as possible, especially in view of the fact that there are great expectations in the Member States and in other countries, especially among the applicant States which are now being given the opportunity to participate in LIFE.
