So who will pay for the vehicles which are to be disposed of?
For us this is straightforward: in the case of new vehicles it should be the manufacturer since this will also compel manufacturers to design and build recyclable cars.
And what about vehicles which are already on the road?
Let us look at an example. Rover in Great Britain, if they were responsible for all end-of-life cars, would actually be responsible for 5.8 million cars within the European Union and would immediately have to set aside EUR 250 million against recycling costs, whereas a manufacturer from Korea building similar cars would only have to shell out peanuts, as a representative of Deutsche Bank put it.
Such distortions in competition are not about environmental protection; they simply affect investment potential and the jobs of those building cars in Europe.
Consequently, for end-of-life vehicles we propose setting up a fund to cover the costs of recycling end-of-life vehicles in order to safeguard the principle of freedom from costs.
I can understand it when colleagues from countries which do not build cars advocate that manufacturers should pay the full whack and that they are not interested in the problem of distortions in competition when it comes to setting aside funds.
However, I would ask these colleagues to show solidarity with the more than 2 million people who make a living from building cars in Europe, so that these jobs can be secured in the future.
I am in favour of stringent environmental requirements, as you know from the auto-oil programme and the debate on exhaust emissions, but I believe that they should be the same for everyone!
Mr President, Commissioner, I think we need this directive.
Firstly, because it clearly stipulates the environmental objectives.
Secondly, because it can promote recycling, which is important.
Thirdly, because it sets out a clear procedure to combat pollution caused by heavy metals.
This is also an important point.
The directive affords a European framework, also to Member States who already have systems in place and who wish to continue to use these.
So, first of all, we need to keep the recycling percentages at their present level. This will, of course, provide the necessary incentive for technological innovation and for identifying ways of dealing with materials that we do not as yet know how to dispose of.
Secondly, we need to retain the details as they are included in the common position.
As from 2006, therefore, all vehicles should be handed in at no cost to their last owners.
Needless to say, this is most definitely an essential point which should not be changed in any way.
Is this too much of a burden?
There is, however, one thing we should not overlook.
The directive applies to complete cars, that is to say cars with none of the essential components missing.
According to the experts, few of these complete cars are of no value.
After all, recycling and the re-use of components form part of a sector which is not necessarily loss-making.
Quite the reverse, in fact. At present, there is a whole raft of companies which make a living out of them, and a decent one at that.
This directive encourages the whole of this sector.
It is a sector which comprises small and medium-sized businesses.
Since, in this case, transport costs are high, a system will have to be introduced which will need to be very much decentralised, because transporting an end-of-life vehicle over a distance of more than 100 km is not a profitable activity.
I think it is a good thing that this directive does not need to apply to historic vehicles, and I think we ought to add this provision to it.
I think, therefore, that vintage cars ought to be exempt.
Also, it is a good thing that we should clearly lay the burden of responsibility with the manufacturer.
That is a basic principle which we must uphold.
As manufacturers are responsible for the design, they can give a great deal of consideration to the environment at the conception phase.
We must also insist that the cost is borne wholly or largely by the manufacturer, as stipulated in the common position.
I find this a well-balanced formula which does not preclude a number of other things.
I think we need to retain it.
This is why our group will remain as close to the common position as possible and will not alter its essence.
After all, we are all aware how difficult it was within the Council to bring this common position about, and that it was a very difficult balancing act to reach this common position.
In my opinion, we should not jeopardise that common position, because it is a directive which we desperately need for environmental reasons.
I would ask you to support this common position.
Our group will, at any rate, do this as far as possible - for environmental reasons and because we have this directive which is well-balanced and encompasses a whole range of issues and difficulties including, for example, the way in which the costs are to be distributed.
Mr President, we need to take an important decision today.
Does this European Parliament support the ecological principle of manufacturer' s liability, that is to say that cars, once they have reached the end of their lives, are the responsibility of the car manufacturer?
No, according to the Christian Democrats in Amendment No. 38: car manufacturers and car drivers should split the cost 50/50.
It is evident from the packaging directive in which this 50/50 compromise is included that this does not work.
Packaging still accounts for a mountain of rubbish in Europe and is a burden upon the environment.
Some of the socialists under the direction of Mr Bernd Lange say: yes, we approve of this principle but we need not implement it until 2010 or 2012 according to Amendment No 45.
The common position stipulates 2006.
According to the group of the Greens, this gives the car industry ample time to make the necessary preparations.
I would therefore urge my colleagues not to support Amendment No 38 of the Christian Democrats and Amendment No 45 of some of the socialists.
If car manufacturers need to bear the cost of recycling their cars, they will design these cars in such a way that they can be re-used more easily and more cheaply.
The problem of plastic and PVC will then no longer exist in cars and these products will be replaced by plant-based bioplastic.
This is ultimately cheaper, also for the consumer.
For twenty years, the majority within Parliament has attempted to make European environmental policy greener.
Today, this green position is being threatened under pressure from, in particular, the German and French car industries.
That is why I urge you to vote against Amendments Nos 38 and 45.
We, the Green Group, by and large support the common position.
Mr President, the waste from end-of-life vehicles is one of our really major environmental problems in terms both of the quantity of waste and of emissions of environmentally hazardous substances.
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left therefore want as comprehensive and consistent a set of regulations as is humanly possible in this area.
With this directive, we have the chance to take a big step forward, but this presupposes that the Council' s position is not torn to shreds and weakened in Parliament' s reading of it.
If they were adopted, many of the amendments which have been tabled would considerably weaken the directive.
This applies, above all, to amendments from the Group of the European People' s Party but also, unfortunately, to some of the amendments from Mr Lange, as I see it.
It is easy to see that the car industry in certain countries, for example in Germany, went in for some pretty tough lobbying before the present directive was adopted.
For ourselves, it is crucial that the following principles should apply.
The polluter should pay.
This means that it is the manufacturer which should take full responsibility, financial as well as otherwise, for recycling vehicles.
There must be rules governing existing vehicles too.
Where this aspect is concerned, we cannot accept any weakening of the Council' s position regarding the date from which the regulations are to come into force.
There should be no falling-off in the percentages concerned or in the requirements for recycling vehicles from particular years, and it is important to limit the use of dangerous substances such as lead.
We shall vote against any amendments which run counter to these considerations.
If those amendments were adopted which would considerably weaken the directive, this would be very detrimental, not only from an environmental point of view but also for the European Parliament' s credibility on environmental issues.
Reference was made earlier on in the debate to the fact that some thought should be given to the millions of people who work in the car industry in various countries and to those countries which have large car industries, for example my own country, Sweden.
I was myself a car worker before I was elected.
I believe I am one of the few members of this Parliament to have stood beside a production line and assembled cars.
I think that very tough demands should be made of the car industry.
These would, of course, be to the advantage of modern, progressive car manufacturers who think in environmentally friendly terms.
It is precisely this type of car industry which we should be encouraging in the European Union.
Mr President, I am very pleased that environmental protection is now a priority for this Parliament, as indeed it is for the citizens of Europe.
There is no doubt that abandoned cars represent a serious threat to the visual and physical environment.
Our citizens expect us in this regard to protect their interests.
Each year, there are between 8 and 9 million vehicles scrapped within the European Union. This in itself generates a large amount of waste.
Car manufacturers, the suppliers of materials and equipment manufacturers must make an effort to limit the use of hazardous substances and therefore must ensure at the design stage that recycled materials can be used in the manufacture of cars.
We know that in the Netherlands there are authorised treatment centres in place to collect end-of-life vehicles and this process should be extended across the length and breadth of the European Union.
From an Irish perspective, I know that the Irish Department of the Environment is already having consultations with motor industry representatives to ensure that appropriate collection centres are put in place in Ireland in the near future to deal with end-of-life vehicles.
I see no reason why licensing arrangements cannot be organised across Europe for collection centres to scrap the 8 to 9 million vehicles which are disposed of within the European Union on an annual basis.
Car manufacturers will have to provide information on the rate of re-use, recycling and recovery of used cars which will be achieved in the coming years.
In accordance with new provisions included in the Amsterdam Treaty all the 370 million consumers within the European Union have a right to consumer-related information.
I believe EU consumers will support those car manufacturers that incorporate the most environmentally-friendly practices in the coming year.
My final point is that the regulations and the legislation must take into account the special position of the vintage car sector throughout the European Community because of its role in relation to the social sector and its environmental and economic considerations.
Mr President, the directive on end-of-life vehicles is certainly a milestone in the improvement of the environment in Europe.
I also think that a great effort has been made to arrive at intelligent recycling of materials, a reduction of polluting waste and the promotion of technological innovation.
In this regard, we are certainly on the right track, but as some Members have already stressed, the real issue here is the possibility that manufacturers' responsibility will become a shared responsibility.
I would like to say that in Italy, considerable headway has been made in this sector; we are perhaps the first in Europe to have regulations encouraging us to take end-of-life vehicles off the market, but in our country the average age of cars on the road is rather high, and we therefore have serious concerns over the problems that this directive could entail for the market.
We need to conduct a serious analysis of the matter.
In Italy, we have begun to withdraw and recycle around 80% of old cars, but there is a market problem which could trigger a crisis - in terms of unemployment given that in Italy industry often resorts to lay-offs and redundancies - and cause problems for workers in different parts of Italy.
We must therefore try to reconcile the two requirements - Parliament is sometimes a little extremist, adopting positions that are either extremely pro-green or extremely anti-green - and, all things considered, find a way to combine the effort made by Mr Florenz and that of other Members, who are trying to reconcile the two positions as best as possible.
These worthwhile amendments are the outcome of this; I think that we will be able to arrive at a solution to the problem, that is, to reconcile environmental requirements with market and labour requirements.
Mr President, this directive deals with the comparatively small but growing problem of abandoned cars and the question of a more structured disposal of all cars at the end of their life.
To that extent, it might be thought desirable, even if it is not a matter of urgent necessity.
The key questions now are who pays the EUR 262 per car for the 9 million cars that are disposed of each year?
Who pays for the collection, the dismantling, the disposal and so on?
And should the directive be retrospective to cover every car that has ever been made?
The proposal from the Council, the common position, is that manufacturers should pay the lot.
That would mean billions of pounds or euros for each of the major companies in each of the countries of the European Union.
That cost would inevitably be passed on to the price and hence to the buyers of new cars.
Because European car manufactures have been operating here for many, many more decades than companies from Japan, Korea and elsewhere, that would be a much greater burden on the older European companies and a competitive gift to their competitors from elsewhere.
I commend Mr Florenz, Mr Lange and others who have sought from both sides of the party divide a compromise based on shared costs.
I also commend to you the amendment standing in my name and colleagues from Germany, Italy, Ireland, Spain, Sweden and Britain, to remove the retrospective nature of this measure.
Retrospective law is bad law, it is unfair law and often it is unworkable law.
Most democratic parliaments in the free world reject it on principle unless there is overwhelming public interest, which clearly there is not in this case.
That is why I have called for a roll-call vote on this.
We can see who is prepared to vote for a retrospection which is of doubtful legality, which would be a costly burden to every future car buyer and a devastating blow for the European car industry.
Mr President, once again I would like to briefly outline the economic issues involved in this directive, and reaffirm my support for the amendments tabled by my colleague, Bernd Lange.
These amendments actually have the advantage - and I should like to stress this - of reconciling environmental constraints and economic imperatives.
The Council' s common position was to say that car manufacturers should bear all, or a significant part, of the costs of recovery and recycling.
But, as Mr Lange so rightly said, this solution is totally unfair to European car manufacturers.
Coming from a country which does have a car manufacturing industry, I can tell you that it is not possible, retroactively, to impose on them the total financial costs for all vehicles of their makes currently on the road, i.e. effectively making them bear the costs arising from 80% of the total number of cars in Europe.
This solution is unacceptable because these car manufacturers have not had the opportunity to build the environmental demands we are making of them today into their manufacturing procedures and their manufacturing costs.
The common position puts European car manufacturers in a disadvantageous position in relation to manufacturers which have just come to the European market.
Of course, we are not here to defend a particular national interest or a particular industrial lobby. We are here to build a Europe that is competitive on the world market and to safeguard jobs in economic sectors where we are actually competitive.
This is why, I urge you to support the amendments tabled by Bernd Lange. These amendments will be supported by the Group of the Party of European Socialists since they effectively reconcile all the interests involved - economic interests and environmental constraints - while granting Member States the freedom to select the means to implement these constraints, since these amendments envisage that the systems in place in the Members States, and some of them work perfectly well, will be able to continue to operate.
Mr President, Commissioner, the proposed directive on end-of-life vehicles before us today aims firstly to guarantee a high level of environmental protection in the Union, but also to safeguard the proper operation of the internal market in this sector.
Let me briefly say that historic and vintage vehicles must, of course, be exempt from the scope of this directive.
Cars are also part of our cultural heritage. I think we would all agree on that.
Having said that, one of the stumbling blocks concerns Article 12, i.e. the date on which the directive will come into force.
Parliament' s proposed solution of 18 months following the directive' s entry into force, for new vehicles, is not terribly realistic.
The European car population amounts to several tens of millions of cars which will have to be recovered even though they were not designed for recycling.
The common position was more feasible since it envisaged 2006 for vehicles already on the road.
This would, furthermore, make it possible to allow firms time to make funds available to meet these additional expenses.
Like my group, I shall therefore support this aspect the common position which, I feel, offers a balanced compromise between constraints upon firms and essential advances in environmental protection.
Mr President, the European Parliament is today facing an important decision.
Will we give our backing to forward-looking environmental and consumer protection or, as the amendments of Florenz, Lange and others cause me to fear, will we allow ourselves to become a servant of the German car industry?
The credibility of Parliament as a champion of environmental protection is at stake.
It would be shameful to say the least if the European Parliament were to draw back from the professions the governments of the 14 Member States and the European Commission have been making concerning manufacturer responsibility and environmental protection!
The intention of Florenz and Lange in their amendments is obvious: to sabotage the directive!
The proposed shared responsibility would undermine the polluter pays principle and detract from product innovation.
In setting up numerous hurdles their sole aim is to hamper an efficient ecological material flow policy and by going down the road of type approvals they seek to delay the implementation of the directives by 12 years or more.
This is totally unacceptable.
I therefore appeal to the German delegates in particular to prevent major political damage occurring today!
The red-green federal government has not exactly covered itself with glory in the debate on the End-of-life Vehicles Directive.
Do not continue in this vein!
The whinging about competitive disadvantages is laughable if it only concerns competitive disadvantages sustained by the German car industry.
Start representing your people and not just your car manufacturers!
Vote in favour of environmental and consumer protection and for innovation in the car and recycling industry!
Mr President, this directive has been under discussion since 1997.
It is high time that we reached an agreement.
Since I more or less share the views of my colleague, Mr Sjöstedt and the representative of the Greens, Mr de Roo, I am not going to use the two minutes allotted to me, and I will highlight just two issues.
Firstly, and this is perhaps the basic point of the proposal, the idea, which goes hand in hand with recycling and the use of waste, that we should use materials which will subsequently cause less pollution.
Another point is that waste should not be incinerated or crushed, not only in the case of lead, cadmium and mercury, but also in the case of waste which contains PVC.
Parliament is currently discussing this issue in another context.
