This is worth a compliment although I regret, of course, that he did not expound it in his own mother tongue.
It is a report which came about with difficulty and may well be too late.
In my opinion, this is mainly down to the wrangling between the two major groups within our Committee on Budgetary Control.
Let us be honest.
The second report of the Wise Men arrived in September.
We are now four months down the line.
Meanwhile, Mr van Hulten has been inundated with amendments, more than 100 amendments in the first round.
He went back to work, rewrote his report and took into account the very many suggestions, but had to face nearly another 100 amendments in the second round.
My fear is that all of this has contributed to a report which is too detailed, too extensive and too late.
Moreover, I have been informed that the Commission has approved a report - today of all days - on the reform of the Commission which will be distributed for further consultation to the various institutions and also to our Parliament, I hope.
Might Mr Kinnock be able to throw some light on the matter this evening?
Mr van Hulten, my Group of the Greens and regionalists will support the attempts in tomorrow afternoon' s plenary meeting to embellish this report.
After all, it makes no sense to copy the many sound recommendations made by the Committee of Wise Men word for word in your report.
So tomorrow, if we vote against some amendments or against specific paragraphs, this is certainly not on account of their content but rather to render your report as a whole more readable.
In any case, it should be clear that my group, of course, fully backs the recommendations made by the Committee of Wise Men.
In any event, I look forward to the document which was approved by the Commission today.
I also look forward to the White Paper which will be available in February.
I have to inform you, Commissioner, that both the report of the Wise Men and that of Mr van Hulten will become gauges for our group, gauges which should make it clear to us whether we can have confidence in the Prodi Commission or not.
I would like to end on the following point. Just as the White Paper on food safety was approved last week and released to public opinion with a clear deadline stated, we would request the same in connection with the new White Paper on the reform of the Commission.
I think that there is a need for this, as public opinion is looking for change and, in any event, my group would like to see a clear change by the end of 2002.
Mr President, this report is positive but, actually, we need more than this.
Fraud, mismanagement and nepotism do not come from nowhere.
They are most likely to occur if there is little democratic control on cash flow.
Via the structural funds, a great deal of the European budget is being pumped around the system.
This is only useful as long as there is a sense of solidarity where rich Member States contribute to both the revenue and development of poorer Member States.
But there is also funding which is being pumped via Brussels back to the same rich Member States.
Districts and regional authorities consider this as their own money but they can only get their hands on this by investing vast amounts of money and manpower in lobbying and negotiating.
After each incident of improper use of this money, and certainly after fraud, the call for stricter control is more pronounced.
Even the strictest control cannot solve this problem.
It will, at best, lead to more bureaucracy and less room for local democracy and for people to get involved in choosing and developing projects.
It would be preferable if national governments channelled this money directly to their local governments without a European detour.
In the next couple of years, we will need to think about the possibility of replacing structural funds by an equalisation fund which is limited to budgetary aid for Member States or their constituent regions with a low income per capita of the population.
This is probably the only way to achieve less fraud, less overheads, more transparency and more democracy.
Mr President, a year has not yet passed, but it is already clear that Parliament is going to evaluate the first and second reports differently.
The first report was widely publicised, formally debated and used - just like the controversy and news leaks which preceded it - to make mincemeat, first of the President of the Commission, and then of the majority of the European Commissioners, even though they had no connection with fraud, mismanagement or nepotism.
Reading now what happened then, not even a year ago, it becomes clear that that first report was intended to do anything but serve the cause of truth or reform, as is maintained today, so much so that this second report - which, on the other hand, could have provided much more salient points - was commissioned with the precise mandate not to address specific cases, since there is no intention to follow up the offences detailed in this report.
It is of no concern to the major groups in Parliament, nor to the majority of the trade unions, who are busy discussing the defence of European public administration, but, in practice, are occupied with the corporate protection of their own members, putting the wide powers afforded to them to dubious use.
Trade union representatives sit on the Disciplinary Board and the Staff Regulations Committee, thereby making it impossible to remove disloyal officials and preserving the Staff Regulations in their fossilised state.
Incomprehensibly, trade union representatives are also members of committees on competition, and I would not be surprised if union members were already members of OLAF, thereby placing this institution which should, at least formally, guarantee its impartiality, at great risk.
I therefore understand why we are meeting at this time, which is usually set aside for other activities and not for debates, discussions and the exchange of information.
Mr President, when it comes to putting its own house in order, the European Commission is in a Catch-22 situation.
There is enormous pressure of expectation following the events that led to the resignation of the previous Commission.
I sometimes have the impression that the more radical the proposals made here in this Chamber sound, the more applause they receive.
There again, it is simply not possible to change situations once and for all with a few strokes of the pen, and the problems begin as soon as we have to start talking about implementation and getting down to brass tacks.
This may explain why we experienced more difficulties than anticipated in the Committee on Budgetary Control as regards this issue.
Nevertheless, the outcome is now on the table and there for all to see, and I would expressly like to thank Mr van Hulten for the work he has done on this report.
Provided this report is not watered-down yet again by the adoption of amendments, it will afford us the opportunity to make clear and unambiguous demands of the Commission on a number of crucial points.
Allow me to start with the most important demand.
We do not want financial control to be abolished.
The financial controller should still be able to make checks before funding commitments or payments are made, not in every case, but wherever uncertainties or risks arise.
The Commission is sending out the wrong signals here, by renaming the Directorate-General for Financial Control as the Directorate-General for Audits, for example.
It may well be easy enough to change the Commission' s organisation chart but it is a different matter when it comes to the legal texts, particularly those relating to budgetary discipline.
I do not have exact figures, but the Community' s budgetary discipline and the associated implementing provisions apply to almost 100 different areas of responsibility of the financial controller, to his or her independence and the tasks assigned to this office.
This cannot be ignored or evaded, certainly not on account of soft law, as was once suggested at a meeting of our Committee.
Irrespective of such legal considerations, it would be an unforgivable mistake, under the circumstances, to scrap financial control in the traditional sense at the very moment when those responsible for such matters in the Commission are, at long last, no longer out on a limb but set to become part of a chain of functioning supervisory and investigatory mechanisms.
As we see it, there will be a dovetailing of three mechanisms in the future: a system of independent prior approval by the financial controller, concomitant and follow-up control by the internal audit service - also known as the audit service - which has yet to be set up, and finally, there will be the targeted tracking-down of irregularities by OLAF, the new anti-fraud office.
It is to be welcomed that Mr van Hulten' s report makes the connection between all three areas and also makes it clear as to where the crucial shortcomings lie, which must be tackled.
A few salient points: the disciplinary procedures are not taking effect, especially when it comes to calling officials to account for their misdemeanours, including those of a financial nature.
There is a large grey area and a great lack of clarity where criminal sanctions are concerned, and it is precisely in this area that the announcements made by the Commission are rather vague.
I can only emphasise that these are the really hard nuts that finally need to be cracked.
Mr President, firstly I would like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to my colleague, Mr van Hulten.
It is a good feeling to be able to say that he is from our delegation and I am, I think, entitled to feel a little proud of him.
I would in any case like to congratulate him on his report.
Mr President, the Commission' s resignation has also created a culture of fear amongst many officials within the hierarchy and large bureaucracy.
The call to make a cultural U-turn and embrace a culture of responsibility seems to me a very fundamental one.
I have witnessed from close up within the Development Committee how thousands of projects stagnate and how sometimes up to 80% of the money is not spent. Sometimes, an enormous reservoir of money is created, not because it is not desperately needed, not because there are no sound proposals, but because the whole system has collapsed.
A lack of responsibility, too much ex ante, not enough ex post and, as a result, far too little in the way of a culture of real effective spending.
It would be marvellous if this report were to give the green light to result-oriented spending of this kind, with all the work organised on that basis.
When the Commission' s first draft report soon becomes the official report on 1 March, I very much hope that our input here will help ensure that we will actually witness this change.
Without any doubt, this will then be a service, Mr President, to the European public and, by means of the results we produce, we will also regain and re-acquire something which we have ostensibly lost over the past couple of years.
This is the best support we can give to European democracy.
If, in this way, we can move away from the culture of the fifties and cross over into the next century, we are witnessing a very special moment indeed.
Mr President, first of all, congratulations to Michiel van Hulten for his first report.
It was a baptism of fire but we have a saying in the Netherlands appropriate for this occasion: in at the deep end and you will swim in no time.
Mr van Hulten, I think you deserve a medal for your efforts.
There are two points which, in my opinion, deserve special attention on the part of the ELDR.
Firstly, there is the Commissioners' individual responsibility.
This must be regulated during the IGC.
However, we should not like this important issue to end up entirely in the hands of the Council and we have, therefore, submitted an amendment in which we ask whether an interinstitutional agreement could be reached between the Commission and Parliament in order to ensure that we have a kind of fall-back position and are not placing our fate completely in the hands of the Council.
Secondly, as already mentioned by my colleague, Mr Mulder, the ELDR is of the opinion that the European Parliament should also be investigated by independent experts.
This will contribute hugely towards re-establishing the confidence of the European citizens in this institution.
We at the European Parliament cannot be a credible counterpart to this reformed Commission as long as we do not search our hearts and put our own House in order as well.
Only when all European institutions are reformed will we have the open, democratic and decisive Europe which our citizens now finally deserve.
Mr President, I also wish to congratulate Mr van Hulten on this first piece of work which he is presenting to the House.
I am sure that it will serve, amongst other things, to make his second report more flexible and for him to step up efforts to find a consensus amongst the groups.
At this stage, there can be no delay in the process of reforming the Commission, demanded by our citizens.
This Parliament has often heard the desire to reform the Commission expressed, even by its Presidents.
It now appears that this desire is more serious.
After the resignation of a Commission and after a Committee of Experts has listed an almost endless number of deficiencies, it makes sense that Mr Prodi should have promised, on 14 September, to present this Parliament with a complete plan for reform by February.
This Parliament anxiously awaits this complete reform programme.
The report that we are debating today intends to give political force to many of the recommendations of the Committee of Experts commissioned by this Parliament.
Mr Prodi said he would act anyway, that he preferred to get things right, but that fear of not getting things right would not prevent him from acting.
We therefore ask that his programme be a bold one and, if it is, I can assure him that he will have the support of this House in the reform process.
We want a strong Commission, which can act in an independent and neutral manner, but with political sense.
Commissioners should not be considered senior officials but rather politicians in office.
Therefore, the report allows them to be members of political parties and to be members of political bodies affiliated to their parties.
Perhaps the reference to the posts is imprecise.
I do not know your exact view in this respect, Mr Kinnock, but it is clear that we want Commissioners who are politically strong and politically committed.
We want a structure which allows every Euro to be spent effectively, and our accounts demonstrate that this is not happening at present.
Therefore, Commissioner, we ask Mr Prodi to present us with a bold programme, and he will find that he has problems with those bodies who feel that their status quo is under threat, but not with this Parliament, which expects profound and daring changes.
Mr President, the Santer Commission came to grief because financial control failed all down the line.
Therefore, the future of this new Commission will depend in no small measure on the extent to which reforms are swiftly undertaken here and financial control is back in working order.
As far as this is concerned, a number of people have already referred to the fact that the Commission intends to drastically improve and consolidate its follow-up checks and that these checks should be carried out on a completely independent basis, with no sweeping of matters under the carpet in future.
Naturally, this is only to be welcomed.
What I do not understand is why this has to come at a price, as it were, that is, of having to dispense with independent - and I stress, independent - prior approval.
Up until now, the Commission' s payments could only be made when the authorising officer signed the appropriate order and the financial controller gave his approval in the form of a visa.
And so it is the "two key" principle that applies here.
A single key is to suffice in future.
The financial controller is no longer to make advance checks, if all goes to plan as regards the reforms currently under discussion within the Commission.
If you will pardon me for saying so, Mr Kinnock, what you are proposing is a little like abolishing the police because they were unable to prevent crimes.
What we really need to focus on, however, is making the checks more effective.
This could be achieved by no longer insisting, in future, that the financial controllers furnish every single payment transaction with their approval stamp.
It is precisely those who feel the need to control everything that end up controlling nothing at all.
Therefore, in future, prior approval should take place in a targeted manner, that is, only in cases of uncertainty or risk.
The officials responsible for financial control should be deployed on a decentralised basis, that is, in the operational Directorates-General, amongst those of their colleagues that spend the money, so that they are immediately available when problems arise and so as to render the checks less ponderous and time-consuming.
However, the financial controllers must work independently.
That is the crucial difference between our plans and those of the Commission, when it talks in terms of decentralisation.
It is obviously the Commission' s intention to make the financial control officials subordinate to the individual Directorates-General, but this is precisely what we do not want.
Surely we have learnt this much from the events surrounding the Leonardo affair, when the internal examiners in the relevant Directorate-General issued warnings, but these were neither heeded nor passed on.
Therefore, independence is prerequisite for effective checks.
That is the position which a clear majority of the Committee on Budgetary Control subscribes to.
Indeed, the new Commission has now declared itself in favour of follow-up checks having this independence, and so would it not make sense for a system of prior approval to enjoy such independence as well?
I believe we should set the seal on this point at tomorrow' s vote.
Mrs Theato has already expressed as much and I am only too willing to support her in this regard.
Mr President, a couple of years ago, the previous Commission tried once and for all to tackle rigid and obsolescent structures.
This led to strikes and smear campaigns by intransigent trade unions, whereupon the proposals were abandoned and replaced by a wishy-washy compromise.
This was stupid of the old Commission, and Parliament was of no help on that occasion.
When I read Mr van Hulten' s passage about personnel policy, I am afraid that Parliament may again be failing to tackle the crucial issues and just spouting a lot of hot air.
There are too many rights, too many regulations and too little room for leadership.
There is no backbone, and no teeth.
Where is the beef?
And I would also say this to you, Commissioner: please, deliver the beef even if it is British.
Romano Prodi promised a revolution.
You have said some powerful and worthwhile things yourself, but take care now that you do not dodge the crucial issues, the ones where it hurts!
Sort out the tangle of staff allowances.
Stand firm on the demand for mobility, not as a right, as it says here in the report, but as a management tool.
Ensure too, that training becomes a management tool.
Do not listen to the report' s demands that temporary staff should have their employment confirmed.
It is the posts which should possibly be made permanent and not necessarily those employed on a temporary basis.
Finally, Mr President, as a member of the Bureau until six months ago, I would urge you to address this issue in the Bureau so that we here in Parliament at least comply, in our own administration, with the demands we are making on others.
We have not done this so far, and this is something you ought to be instrumental in changing.
Mr President, I want to thank Mr van Hulten for his report and to say that I voted for it.
So I refer to the things I do not agree with.
I do not agree with the paragraphs in relation to Parliament.
This report is about the Commission.
Parliament is a separate subject.
There is no need for us to bring Parliament into the discussion on the Commission.
In addition to that, there is the question of duty-free.
That was a stick used to beat the Commission by the duty-free lobbies who resented the fact that the Commission abolished duty-free in airports.
It is not worthy of being brought into this report either.
