I agree with previous speakers who have said that the polluter should pay, and this proposal expresses that idea very well.
Producers must pay - although we all know that the consumer will ultimately suffer the consequences of this - and they must take responsibility for the costs before 2006, as some of the amendments propose.
We are more in agreement with the amendment proposed at first reading.
It is also important to set percentages and a date for vehicles to be composed of recyclable materials.
I believe that this proposal relies on very long deadlines.
Lastly, Mr President, I believe we should favour the creation of small and medium-sized businesses which, if subject to rigorous approval and duly authorised, can promote the creation of jobs in this very important area, preventing the emergence of monopolies by large companies.
Mr President, today the European Parliament must face up to real responsibilities.
We have to work out what we are going to do with the millions of vehicles we abandon each year.
In some of our Member States, voluntary environmental agreements have already been signed to ensure that our ditches, canals and fields are not filled with these ugly and dangerous wrecks, inhabited occasionally by an alarmed farmyard chicken.
I come, of course, from a country that is proud of its car industry and of its commercial success both in Europe and in third countries.
I can gauge its importance for my country' s international reputation.
I know of the proactive attitude of the European car manufacturing industry which has set up an extensive research programme to outline a national information system for dismantling end-of-life vehicles.
I am aware of the difficulties the Council experienced in finding a compromise.
That is why, today, we must be understanding alchemists, concerned for our environment.
This will either be the century of waste management or it will not.
As far as I am concerned, at least, the principle of 'polluter pays' must be applied.
The car industry, increasingly more respectful of the environment, has, I am sure, anticipated this kind of increasing awareness.
Indeed it is accepting its responsibilities.
It is the Member States, however, who will have to implement this directive, and let us beware of going into too much detail because the industrial traditions, the demolition and crushing sectors vary according to whether you are in Italy or in Finland.
I am opposed to making the car owners liable.
The men and women on the move throughout Europe pay for their car and their catalytic converter, pay their national taxes and the tax on fuel and are therefore already paying a high price for their magnificent machine and their freedom of movement.
It would certainly be unwise for my fellow Members in the major groups of the federalist tendency to seek to make the European Parliament unpopular in this way by creating a liability shared between the owner and the manufacturer.
How, furthermore, can a fund be created which will pay for vehicle recycling and manage operations within Europe.
Who is to pay for recycling the car I bought in France if I register it in Belgium?
Which national fund will pay for my end-of-life vehicle?
Let us beware, too, of worrying the world of business with the legal uncertainty of an unacceptable retroactive application.
It is not our intention to start a punitive legislative campaign here today, but to continue on our present course, advocating sustainable development.
Mr President, most of the time, the European Parliament, spearheaded by environment committees, does its very best to make a critical assessment of the proposals submitted by the European Commission or the Council, so as to improve on them from an environmental point of view.
Now, a sound common position submitted by the Council is in danger of being changed for the worse from an environmental point of view here in Parliament.
Every year, we discard a huge amount of cars which contain many dangerous substances.
This is why it is important to prevent waste materials.
We should also aim for minimum quantities of heavy metals, as well as of other dangerous substances and materials.
In addition, car manufacturers need to produce and build these cars in such a way as to facilitate simple dismantling and re-use.
What is left of the stripped vehicle also requires to be processed adequately.
I therefore welcome with open arms the percentage levels for re-use and recycling which have been proposed by the Council.
These days, the complete dismantling of end-of-life vehicles is economically viable.
This means that we move away from shredding.
The prescribed objectives are most certainly viable and, in the Netherlands, a value of 86% recycling has now already been achieved.
The best way of achieving proper collection is to ensure that the last holder and/or owner can deliver the car to an authorised treatment facility without any cost.
The processing cost can then be incorporated in the price of new cars.
The proposals made by a few MEPs impact greatly on this system.
The so-called shared liability is very cumbersome and does not stimulate innovation.
If the system of delivering cars to treatment facilities without any cost is applied, it will also transpire that the cost of processing will come down considerably.
Finally, this directive should enter into force at the earliest opportunity.
A laborious conciliation procedure would entail an unnecessary delay, at the expense of the environment.
Why cannot we just be satisfied with the common position currently tabled? If we are, then all that remains for us to do is to congratulate the Council on the result achieved.
Mr President, I hold Mr Florenz in high esteem.
He has delivered excellent work under pressure both from his colleagues and from the car industry.
Add to this the fact that he had to do this from his green approach and, against that background, find a compromise. That was not easy.
Overall, I am not dissatisfied with the present common position and certainly not with the philosophy underlying that common position.
I would like to comment on two things. Firstly, vintage cars and motorbikes.
These should indeed be excluded from the directive. Secondly, the controversial question as to who bears the responsibility for taking back cars.
I do not wish to alter the text of the common position in any way.
The manufacturer is and should be liable and the last holder and/or owner must be able to hand back the car without any cost.
In my opinion, there is too much initial hesitation.
The car lobby has led too many people up the garden path.
I would also like to mention that experience has nonetheless taught us that the processing cost is in fact passed on.
These costs are not very high.
In the Member State where I come from, you are talking about 150 Guilders per car.
If you charge this from day one, you can process the old cars straight away.
A very large industry might then emerge which would ensure that scrapyards, which used to be a common feature in our Member States, would then disappear.
I do not wish to make any changes to this particular aspect of the compromise.
I think it would be a good thing if we were to approve the present legislation together as soon as possible.
This is positive because, in that way, the nine million cars which are introduced each year onto European roads will actually be processed appropriately, and this will benefit us all.
Mr President, the present directive is important in so far as it helps prevent our being faced with hazardous waste from end-of-life vehicles and in so far as it promotes the re-use and recycling of materials from scrapped cars.
I therefore think it is crucial for the environment that the ban on using poisonous heavy metals should be fully implemented and that we should not reduce manufacturers' liability.
If we do reduce it, we remove from manufacturers the incentive to design and produce cars which give rise to less waste.
The common position, which was arrived at with great difficulty in the Council, which the Commission has endorsed and which was also maintained in Parliament' s Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, complies fully with the environmental requirements. I therefore find it incomprehensible and very curious to see amendments from members of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy, the objectives of which are to weaken the environmental requirements and significantly reduce car manufacturers' liability.
If these amendments are adopted, I think that we shall cause Parliament seriously to lose credibility on environmental issues.
So far, we here in Parliament have been positive catalysts for environmental protection but now, if the amendments proposed by Mr Florenz and Mr Lange are adopted, we are to become a negative factor for the environment in Europe.
What is more, if we reduce manufacturers' liability on this issue, this will also have serious consequences for subsequent matters in other areas, for example the forthcoming directive on scrap from computers and other electronic equipment.
I would therefore recommend to Members of Parliament that we cut across party lines and vote against all the amendments to the common position which would weaken environmental standards and reduce manufacturers' liability.
We shall then be able to achieve an environmentally respectable result.
Mr President, this excellent directive will end the dumping of old cars, encourage recycling, and above all encourage manufacturers to design cars which can easily be recycled.
Now who should pay the costs?
Whatever system is adopted, ultimately the cost will be passed on to the consumer.
The best way of achieving our environmental objectives is to make the manufacturers our instrument both for collecting the money and for disposing and recycling of the cars.
The manufacturers have tricked Mr Florenz and Mr Lange into tabling amendments here which seriously weaken these proposals.
Do not be fooled by the car manufacturers!
If you want the full benefits of this directive use your vote to throw out these amendments.
Mr President, Commissioner, this debate is not a technical debate, contrary to what we may think.
It has become eminently political.
Yesterday we honoured our institution with a political debate.
Today, if 314 Members of Parliament yield to the strength of the lobbying of some car manufacturers, we should be doing ourselves dishonour.
In expecting consumers to bear half the cost of the recovery of end-of-life vehicles, as Amendment No 38 stipulates, even though the common position states that all recovery costs should be borne by the manufacturer, Parliament would, for the first time, not be acting as the defender of the rights of the consumers and citizens of Europe, it would be turning into mere sounding box for different lobbies.
We cannot accept this.
It would be a precedent which would open the door to all sorts of pressure in many other areas.
It would also be the first time that the European Parliament would be weakening a Council position, whereas usually we are complaining that their position is not strong enough.
The free recovery system, for example, for old vehicles and raising the percentage to be recycled will increase recycling activities and the number of jobs this generates accordingly.
Thus, for the consumer, for the environment and for the new jobs to be created in recycling, the Council' s common position definitely must not be amended. It is, as it stands, perfectly acceptable.
Mr President, like so many others here today, I believe this is a good measure.
This is a useful measure and it is one which we all need.
Most of the technical issues have been resolved.
There are some details to be finalised but most of the technical issues have been resolved.
We have arrived at the final question.
In the first reading debate it was only the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee which asked this question and it was only myself as the draftsman of the opinion of that committee who posed that question in Parliament. That is quite simply: Who pays?
The Council common position reached a reasonable compromise in that the manufacturers should pay a significant part of the cost, not all of it as Mr Bowis has mistakenly said.
In fact perhaps as little, the lawyers tell us, as 20% or one-fifth of the cost. That is not unreasonable.
If you look at the UK consumer for example, who buys a Rover, as Mr Lange has indicated or for that matter any other make of car in the UK and who has for years been paying excessive prices for those cars, over and above comparable prices in other parts of Europe, why should they pay?
They have paid already.
Why should the very same people as taxpayers or as future car buyers, pay again to dispose of the vehicle that the manufacturer has made the profit from?
I cannot accept that.
There are amendments here today that are proposing that should be the case.
I cannot accept it and I will not vote for it.
The responsibility for these cars lies with the manufacturer.
It is the manufacturer who has to provide the infrastructure and provide a reasonable part of the cost of disposal.
The common position does not preclude the possibility of contributions being made by government.
The common position is a reasonable compromise.
Some of the amendments today are totally unreasonable in that they take away completely the responsibility from the car manufacturer of paying a little if any of the cost of disposal of cars on the road.
I cannot accept that and on behalf of the taxpayers and the consumers of Europe I am voting against those amendments.
Mr President, there is agreement that we must give some thought as to how we in Europe will properly deal with end-of-life cars, although in this instance the Council has not provided a model for a suitable European environment policy.
It is disgraceful the way in which the German Presidency handled this matter.
Firstly, Herr Trittin, the Environment Minister, was not in tune with his colleagues in the Cabinet, then Chancellor Schröder blundered in like a bull in a china shop, having no expert knowledge of this process.
Mind you, even the Resolution of the Finnish Council Presidency in June was not the best result that could have been done achieved.
There are certain weaknesses, the greatest of which, in my opinion, is that not enough consideration is being given to the situation of small businesses; after all, the car industry is more than just large companies.
It is in the area of supply that small business plays an important role and we must not fail to also take account of the interests of those employed in small and medium-sized enterprises.
For there are considerably more than two million people employed in this sector.
The plight of small businesses is also addressed by numerous amendments from the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Policy and also the amendments in question from our group to Article 5 concerning costs.
The common position is also no great shakes from an environmental viewpoint.
It fails to take in the bigger picture and when my fellow delegate from the Greens says that this is the first time that the European Parliament has toned down a common position, I really must object, because quite simply, it is not environmentally meaningful to restrict the use of modern, low-consumption cars such as the 3-litre car, which contain a great deal of plastic, by means of rigid, high recycling quotas!
Consequently, we must support an amendment which at least permits exceptions in the case of particularly economical cars.
The objections of the industry in this matter are certainly not without foundation.
However, the arguments of the plastics and car industries would be more persuasive if a commitment were to be given to reducing CO2 levels in Europe in other sectors besides these.
Mr President, we are indeed now in a very rare situation: those who wish to uphold environmental values will take the side of the Council in their common position.
In contrast to what the previous speaker said, I can say I am really proud that a common position was achieved during the Finnish Presidency to uphold environmental values.
If we slide away from the common position and try to divide the recycling costs, we will be creating a loophole: we will not have created a rational, clear system in which the division of responsibilities is in order.
That is why, in my opinion, the manufacturer must take the greatest share of the responsibility.
Only then will we find an adequate solution to the problem, taking into consideration the fact too that the manufacturer should be encouraged to make vehicles whose parts can be recycled at the smallest possible cost in the future.
Mr President, there are two issues of principle in the Council' s draft directive.
The first concerns the manufacturer' s unrestricted liability to take back end-of-life vehicles.
There is the risk of creating a monopoly within the car dismantling trade.
This particularly applies in areas within the EU where distances are great and where a lot of small companies are involved in dismantling vehicles.
I believe that, quite apart from the nature of the issue concerned, the EU' s directives should not treat small companies within the Union unfairly.
Unrestricted liability on the part of manufacturers would also be in danger of creating a situation in which the market for used car parts disappears, for manufacturers would have a greater responsibility to sell new parts.
Yet the trade in used car parts is important, especially for those who collect and renovate older vehicles.
The principle of unrestricted liability on the part of manufacturers is also dubious in terms of the principles governing the market economy.
It should be possible for changes to be made to companies and for the latter to be sold and wound up.
They should be able to establish themselves in new markets, but also to leave old markets.
To bind manufacturers by means of a liability which can extend very far back in time ill accords with a flexible market economy designed to promote development.
The second principle in the Council' s common position is the retroactive element in the draft directive.
It conflicts with established economic and legal principles retroactively to impose upon a manufacturer financial liability for its product.
To do so also changes the owner' s liability retroactively.
Over the years, a consumer may have altered the product in a number of ways.
Every country within the EU now has rules governing the scrapping of cars.
Some may be better than others, and some worse.
In anticipation of this EU directive' s being implemented, EU countries ought however to be individually liable for scrapping vehicles in the best way possible so that the retroactive element in the EU legislation is not applied.
This does not conflict with a financing model involving the building up of funds.
Mr President, everyone agrees with the obvious environmental and industrial importance of the instrument in question.
The common position offers an acceptable compromise but its rather delicate and precarious nature somewhat restricts the opportunities for improvement, and puts the whole directive at risk.
I therefore maintain that Parliament cannot force the issue and it would be paradoxical for it to do so in the context of redefining the environmental scope of the instrument.
