Nothing has changed there.
As has always been the case, there are offences that transcend European offences, as it were, or at least there is the potential for them to do so, and these might include money-laundering, receiving stolen goods, and forming a criminal organisation.
As far as that is concerned, I believe there are judicial uncertainties that need to be overcome.
What Parliament needs to do as a matter of urgency though - and this is why we intend to vote for recital 1 without these recommendations - is to send out a clear political signal to the Commission and Council that we want to see a clear legislative act put an end to this disorderly state of affairs.
Mr President, for years, Parliament has called for specific and uniform protection under criminal law of the Union' s financial interests.
Frustration inevitably sets in when we see the weakness of the Convention (and of the protocols relating to this protection) which, five years after being signed, has still not been ratified and has still not come into force.
On the other hand, more pro-active attempts, such as OLAF, which is currently operating, have not allayed legitimate concerns about the system of guarantees for individual rights.
The proposals in Mrs Theato' s report seek to encourage the Commission to present a substantive legislative measure on the protection, under criminal law, of our financial interests, which would criminalise certain activity, specifically fraud against the Community budget. These proposals represent a serious attempt to establish a new and ever more urgently-needed uniform criminal law for the whole Community.
At the same time they call for the existence of an independent body to coordinate and monitor the thoroughness of investigations by OLAF, without harming the administration of justice by each Member State and under the supervision of the European Court of Justice.
Finally, following on from what was agreed in Tampere, the report restates the need for a European Public Prosecutor. This issue has been brought once again to the fore by Commissioner Vitorino' s timely decision to ask the IGC to include in its agenda the creation of this new role, which everyone considers vital.
We should approve this report because it highlights the need to maintain efficient legal control over our institutions, by protecting the Union' s financial system with a substantive and procedural European law which is capable of maintaining the credibility of the Community' s economic life.
Nevertheless, it raises some very basic questions.
Is there currently a sufficient legal basis for justifying, in legal terms, the creation of a specifically Community-wide criminal law which, although it might be called subsidiary, will always clash with the practice, and in certain areas, with the traditional, separate criminal law of the Member States?
As there are doubts, would it not be more advisable, from a political point of view, to put the reform of the legal system on the IGC agenda, and incorporate these proposals into the more general reform of the Union' s legal system along the lines of what is being requested for the European Public Prosecutor?
Surely these subjects will be of the greatest relevance to a revision of the treaties which will contribute to the stability of the area of freedom, security and justice?
Mr President, the EU is now exposed to tough scrutiny.
Confidence in the European Union has been seriously damaged.
To remedy this, vigorous efforts are required.
We therefore welcome increased resources for OLAF so that we can investigate any suspicions more efficiently.
At the same time, we think it is obvious that those who commit crimes against the EU must be able to be held accountable in an effective way.
It is unfortunate that the convention for protecting the Union' s financial interests has been put into effect in so few Member States.
We therefore think it only right that the Commission should have the task of tabling proposals entailing the further development of the already existing legal framework.
On the other hand, I am not convinced that making the process more efficient in this way requires common European legislation or centralisation of the fight against crime.
In the present situation, I am therefore sceptical about the idea of a European prosecutor, which it is scarcely possible to implement within the framework of the present treaty.
We have more confidence in Eurojust, where prosecutors from the individual nations cooperate.
The major problem is not that no measures are being taken against crimes committed against the Union but, rather, that these are committed so often and far too seldom discovered.
The challenge for the Commission and for ourselves is, however, to find the right mix.
The mismanagement and examples of fraud which occur ought not to lead to our ending up in an old-fashioned hierarchical bureaucracy which, through an exaggerated supervision of detail, prevents the development of a modern administration.
We therefore welcome the aggressive approach of Mr van Hulten' s report.
The main idea ought to be that each administration takes responsibility for its own supervision.
Our experience of modern administration tells us that openness, decentralisation of responsibility and qualified evaluation are often as effective as detailed bureaucratic supervision.
The major challenge is, therefore, to create a modern and efficient administration without compromising on supervision and the rule of law.
This requires staff training, more modern recruitment methods and, above all, openness and public control.
Being able to scrutinise the administration effectively is the best protection against irregularities.
Mr President, rapporteur, restoring the confidence of the citizens in the work of the European institutions and in European politics is one of the most important tasks we have before us.
The Commission has given its commitment to this task and the draft for the overall package of internal reforms documents this.
Parliament is committed to this task, which is something this report bears impressive witness to.
On behalf of the Commission I am able to congratulate the rapporteur on having again addressed the genuinely difficult question as to what we can do, in terms of creating legal bases and effecting institutional change, to step up the fight against fraud perpetrated against the European Union.
On ratifying the Amsterdam Treaty, all Member States stated that they wanted to accord combating fraud against the financial interests of the European Union the same priority as combating fraud to their own detriment.
Yet as things stand, only the first four Member States have ratified the agreement concluded in 1995.
The Commission wholeheartedly agrees with the rapporteur that this is an unacceptable situation
A legislative act, a directive, in which there is a standardised definition for the different types of fraud such as money-laundering or corruptibility, and in which the obligation to launch criminal proceedings is enshrined as a binding objective, may enable us to take a major step forwards, and I will therefore advise the Commission to examine this step with all due haste.
OLAF, the European anti-fraud office is one of the most important instruments the Commission has for fulfilling its obligation to combat fraud.
Accordingly, the Commission refused to put up with the fact that both European banks, the ECB and the EIB, contested the right of OLAF to include these two institutions in its investigations, citing their independent status.
This is why the Commission resolved on raising a complaint against these two banks at its last meeting, and I hope that Parliament approves this step.
The second recommendation in this report relates to assessing the legitimacy of the investigative measures undertaken by OLAF in the various European institutions.
It is the task of the monitoring committee for OLAF, which was set up at the same time as OLAF, to safeguard the independence of OLAF, however it cannot undertake the action mentioned in the report of monitoring internal investigative activities conducted by OLAF.
I am fully in agreement with the monitoring committee and the rapporteur on this point.
In other words, there is a loophole here which must be filled and I will examine the solution advocated in the report in the interests of moving things on.
There is one thing I would ask though: I believe we must prevent the debate on extending the legal basis for OLAF from leading to the misconception that OLAF does not now have enough authority.
No, there must be no undermining of OLAF' s authority, and neither do I think this was the rapporteur' s intention.
As such, I would ask you to give OLAF' s work your full support, also in its present form.
Thank you, Commissioner Schreyer.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 p.m.
VOTE
(Parliament approved the Commission proposal)
Heaton-Harris (PPE-DE).
Mr President, on a point of order I should like to ask you for clarification of the Rules of Procedure: namely Rules 133(2) and 138(4). These are both about voting.
Is it not the case that on votes other than roll-call votes, the vote should take place initially by show of hands and only then, if there is some doubt, should we utilise the electronic voting system?
That is quite right, Mr Heaton-Harris. I put the matter to a vote by a show of hands because none of the groups had requested voting by roll call.
You know that voting by roll call or electronic checking only takes place if Members of the House request it.
In this particular case, I can assure you there was a large majority in favour of the directive which we have just voted on.
Mr President, I was not referring to that particular vote but to votes in general.
It is obvious that some presidents do not look at the hands, so to speak, but go straight to the electronic voting system.
I was wondering whether this is the correct procedure.
I know it takes longer, but should we not always have a show of hands first?
Mr President, as far as the second reading is concerned, the Commission can only accept one proposed amendment put forward by Parliament.
The Commission hereby adopts this amendment and accepts it.
(The President declared the common position approved (as amended))
Report (A5-0104/1999) by Mr Koch, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive amending Directive 94/55/EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States with regard to the transport of dangerous goods by road (COM(1999)0158 - C5-0004/1999 - 1999/0083(COD))
(Parliament adopted the legislative resolution)
Report (A5-0108/1999) by Mrs Schroedter, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the communication from the Commission in the field of the Structural Funds and their coordination with the Cohesion Fund: guidelines for programmes in the period 2000-2006 (COM(1999)0344 - C5-0122/1999 - 1999/2127(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0107/1999) by Mr Berend, on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy, Transport and Tourism, on the Sixth Periodic Report on the Social and Economic Situation and Development of the Regions of the European Union (SEC(1999)0066 - C5-0120/1999 - 1999/2123(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0069/1999) by Mr von Wogau, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission White Paper on modernisation of the rules implementing Articles 85 and 86 of the EC Treaty (COM(1999)0101 - C5-0105/1999 - 1999/2108(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0078/1999) by Mr Rapkay, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the European Commission' s XXVIIIth Report on Competition Policy (1998) (SEC(1999)0743 - C5-0121/1999 - 1999/2124(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0087/1999) by Mr Jonckheer, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the seventh survey on state aid in the European Union in the manufacturing and certain other sectors (COM(1999)148 - C5-0107/1999 - 1999/2110(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
Report (A5-0073/1999) by Mr Langen, on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, on the Commission Report on the implementation in 1998 of Commission Decision No 2496/96/ECSC of 18 December 1996 establishing Community rules for State aid to the steel industry (Steel Aid Code) (COM(1999)94 - C5-0104/1999 - 1999/2107(COS))
(Parliament adopted the resolution)
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Own resources
. (FR) The European Union is apparently financed through four own resources.
The European budget is effectively sourced from VAT and on the basis of GDP, especially now that the Community preference system has been abandoned and the multiplication of free trade areas has put paid to customs duties and the common agricultural levy, which had already been cut back drastically by the Generalised System of Preferences.
Since then, Community VAT fraud and distortions in the calculation of GDP, the taxable basis for the fourth resource, have had a perceptible effect on the yield and justice of Community resources.
Since then, of course, this Europe with pretensions to federalism is now more than ever financed like the commonplace intergovernmental organisation it actually is, but which it refuses to see itself as.
This can be clearly seen in the regulation before us.
It shows a concern with the accounting involving own resources, the process of making them available or with the monitoring of declared amounts made available to the Commission.
Furthermore, the new Advisory Committee that has been created is made up of representatives of the taxpaying Member States.
This is a long way from offshoots such as the "Community criminal code" , the "European Public Prosecutor" or a European police force, with OLAF.
There is as yet no federal European tax.
All the same, a Europe with 25 members will be wanting a European tax on income, if not on profits, or the tax on CO2 to finance the budget for 2025.
Koch Report (A5-0105/1999)
- (FR) It is with great satisfaction that I welcome this report on improved harmonisation in the training of safety advisers for the transport of dangerous goods.
In recent years, the transportation of dangerous goods nationally and internationally has increased considerably, increasing the risk of accidents.
Some of these risks were due to an inadequate awareness of the risks inherent in such transportation.
It therefore proved necessary, in the context of establishing the internal market, to adopt some measures intended to ensure better risk prevention.
Directive 96/35/EC was a response to this requirement.
Firms involved in the transport of dangerous goods and in the loading and unloading operations related to such transportation have been obliged, quite rightly, to comply with regulations regarding risk prevention, whether road, rail or inland waterway transport is involved.
In order to facilitate achieving this objective, Directive 96/35/EC provided for the appointment of safety advisers for dangerous goods who would have appropriate professional training.
This professional training would be targeted at awareness of the terms of the legislation, regulations and administrative conditions applicable to such transport.
While this represented significant progress at the time, the lack of specific terms governing the harmonisation of examination requirements proved to be a problem.
It therefore seemed essential to make good this omission in order to achieve the standardised, high-level training of safety advisers, but also in order to avoid any disparities between the costs of training, with a concomitant effect on competition between the firms of different Member Sates.
The Commission proposal seeks to ensure that the training of safety advisers is standardised.
It outlines the minimum content of examinations and defines the role of the authorising body as well as the requirements demanded of the examining bodies.
Parliament voted in favour of this text.
It did, however, table a number of amendments, most of which were adopted in the Council' s common position, particularly regarding the need to draw up a questionnaire and statements on the authorisation of some document in the context of the 'specification of the examination arrangements proposed by the examination body' .
In order to be realistic, I further support postponing the date for the application of these conditions until three months after the directive itself comes into force.
I shall conclude by emphasising that harmonising the professional qualifications of advisers will contribute to improving the quality of the service in the interest of users, to minimising the risks of accident likely to cause damage to the environment as well as significant damage liable to be harmful to any person who may come into contact with dangerous goods.
Koch Report (A5-0104/1999)
Last October I expressed my views on the Hatzidakis report on the transport of dangerous goods by rail.
The views I shall express today are not far removed from those I had then.
Essentially, my opinion is as follows: I deplore the fact that, in a field as crucial as the transport of dangerous goods, we keep putting off the adoption of harmonised standards to the detriment of human beings and the environment.
I shall point out that a directive on the approximation of Member State legislation on the transport of dangerous goods by road came into force on 1 January 1997.
This included a number of interim conditions valid until 1 January 1999.
This is the time when we should have expressed our opinion of the Commission proposal to put an end to the derogations.
In line with the usual procedure, it is the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) which puts forward standards in this area, and they are then integrated in to the European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road signed in Geneva in 1957 (known generally as ADR), applicable throughout Europe, whose terms and conditions form the basis for the legislation applicable within the EU.
The CEN has been unable to complete its work in the time allotted.
Consequently, the Commission proposal under discussion today is intended to amend the directive in order to provide a short-term solution to these problems, rather than to put an end to the transitional arrangements, as should have been the case!
This is exactly what happened in the case of transport of such goods by rail, except for the fact that a time limit had been decided.
Right now we do not have the slightest idea as to when the CEN will be in a position to put forward practical proposals.
Until then, there is really no point in Member States amending their national regulations.
The report also accepts that some flexibility may be adopted, and grants States the option of adopting or applying alternative standards.
They may, therefore, continue to enforce their own standards regarding certain types of pressure vessel used for transportation, where there are no applicable European standards.
They may also adopt alternative conditions for transportation of a local nature and for ad hoc transportation.
In offering this explanation of my vote, therefore, I wished to express my deep dissatisfaction and my deep concern.
Schroedter Report (A5-0108/1999)
Mr President, I wanted to press home my explanation of vote by this oral explanation following on from the Schroedter report with regard to regional development.
I would urge both the Member States and the Commission to give sufficient consideration to the huge disparities in wealth which continue to exist between the different regions in Europe.
Not only the difference in income per capita but, above all, large disparities in employment continue to give cause for concern.
Despite the fact that the Community, through the structural funds among others, injects considerable sums into combating the disparities between regional development opportunities in Europe, these disparities continue to exist.
I therefore wonder whether the Community should not have a more drastic change of tack and, based on very strict evaluations, change its course and change its objectives in such a way as to make it possible to combat the disparities in wealth and employment more effectively.
Mr President, in relation to the Schroedter report, I am aware, and have had it confirmed to me by Mr Barnier, that the rules on additionality concerning Structural Funds apply only at the level of Member States and do not apply in a transitive and transparent way inside Member States in favour of self-governing regions such as Wales or Scotland.
I regard that as a very unsatisfactory state of affairs.
I hope we can revisit this issue at a later time.
I want it to be clear that though I voted in favour of the report, I have this important reservation.
- The Schroedter report speaks of the need to promote partnerships with regard to the spending of EU Structural Funds in Europe for the period 2000-2006.
I believe that this is particularly important as EU Structural Funds are always spent in a manner which maximises the economic development of different regions when local and regional authorities are involved in the decision-making process for the spending of such funds.
As a Member of the European Parliament for the constituency of Leinster, I have always supported the need for the implementation of bottom-up schemes supported by national EU funds.
I believe that the Irish Government and the European Commission and different EU governments cannot alone decide on specific spending priorities.
I believe that local authorities and groups from the private and voluntary sector should be fully involved in the decision-making process for the spending of European Structural Funds.
For example, we have seen the success of the Leader I and Leader II schemes in Ireland in terms of the jobs which have been created through the administration of these programmes in rural parts of Ireland and within Europe.
The Leader III scheme is set to be implemented some time later this year.
The Leader programme at its core affords an opportunity for public, private and voluntary groups to pool their collective talents so as to create long-term and sustainable jobs in small and medium-sized enterprises in rural areas.
This is a classic example of how the partnership concept operates and such schemes must be supported in its broadest remit.
The European Peace and Reconciliation Fund has also been a success in creating jobs in border counties in Ireland.
Once again, there is active participation from groups from the private, public and voluntary sectors which suggest how best particular funding can be spent so as to help different local job creation projects within this region.
During the next round of EU Structural Funds 2000-2006, other EU initiatives such as "Equal" and "Urban" will be operating.
